
--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---

Daniel Quinlan
Stuart Lloyd and Graham Bottley
Adventure
System
Creation


--- PAGE 3 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
2
This Edition Print: 2024
Fighting Fantasy is © Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone all rights reserved
Fighting Fantasy, including the Fighting Fantasy shield, is a trademark of Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone and is used under license
Advanced Fighting Fantasy is © Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone all rights reserved
Cover Illustration is © copyright © 2015 Dean Spencer, used with permission. All rights reserved.
Internal illustrations are © copyright Alan Langford, Tony Hough, Nik Williams, Bill Houston, Bob Harvey and Russ Nicholson
Some artwork copyright William McAusland, used with permission
Thank you to Mark Stanley, ELF Vesala and Glen Sharman for additional proofreading.
Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone hereby assert their moral right to be identified as the authors of Advanced Fighting Fantasy in 
accordance with the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988.
No part of this book may be copied or reproduced without express wri8en permission from the copyright holders.


--- PAGE 4 ---

CONTENTS
Chapter 1 - Introduction 
 
 
 
 
Page 4
Chapter 2 - Using this book  
 
 
 
Page 5
Chapter 3 - General Guidance 
 
 
 
Page 7
Chapter 4 - Se8lements 
 
 
 
 
Page 45
Chapter 5 - Dungeons  
 
 
 
 
Page 161
Chapter 6 - Wilderness  
 
 
 
 
Page 195
Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors 
Page 239
Chapter 8 - Rumours and Events  
 
 
Page 269
Chapter 9 - Villains 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 277
Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests & Adventures  
Page 315
Chapter 11 - Adventurers Guild 
 
 
 
Page 399
Chapter 12 - Adventure Consequences & Rewards Page 407
Chapter 13 - Treasure  
 
 
 
 
Page 413
Appendix I - List of Tables 
 
 
 
 
Page 427
Appendix II - List of Codes  
 
 
 
Page 431
Appendix III - Solo Flowchart 
 
 
 
Page 432
Kickstarter Backers 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 433
Index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 435


--- PAGE 5 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
4
1 -  INTRODUCTION
A few years ago Graham, myself and a few of our 
friends (who have been invaluable in making this 
book) were debating a topic which will be familiar to 
many people who enjoy roleplaying games - the 
challenge of creating worlds and adventures, and 
how much work the Director has to put in to deliver 
an adventure. Whilst opinions varied we all agreed 
that the task could be made a lot simpler and with the 
proper resources solo play would also be possible. As 
I had already begun writing some rules covering 
encounters and maps in cities I offered to make an 
a8empt - rashly imagining that it would be 
reasonably straightforward - and several years later I 
am happy to report that our earlier debate now has a 
conclusion, and I would like to welcome you to the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy Adventure Creation 
System! In this book, we will set out advice and 
procedures that will let you create cities, dungeons 
and wilderness areas for you to use in your 
adventures and provide you with horrible villains 
and plots to test your heroes abilities. All you will 
need is some paper, a pen or pencil, a few six sided 
dice and a sprinkling of imagination.
This book can be used as the basis for solo adventures 
or as an aid for people playing in a group, with or 
without a Director. It provides the means for you to 
quickly create playable environments in which you 
can either set your own adventures or play out the 
example 
missions 
and 
quests 
created 
using 
randomised tables. Either way, the aim is to enhance 
your time spent as a hero of Titan, so one general rule 
should be stated right at the start - feel free to modify 
anything you come across so it be8er suits your 
vision of the world!
The 
Adventure 
Creation 
System 
splits 
the 
environment into three sections: Se8lements (cities, 
towns and villages), dungeons and the wilderness. 
For each type of environment, we provide the means 
to create unique and varied maps for your hero to 
use, encounters to challenge them and people to 
meet.
 Of course, a hero needs something to do in the world 
they have created. This book provides a wide 
selection of villains to challenge your hero and a 
compendium of plots to work through, or be used as 
part of your own campaigns, as well as a system to 
create more quests and missions.
Armed with this book, a pencil, some paper and a few 
six sided dice, you can rapidly assemble everything 
you need to play Advanced Fighting Fantasy, either 
as a solo hero or as part of a group.
 We hope that the rules and ideas in this book provide 
enormous assistance to you in your adventures, 
whether they be a hero taking on the dangers of the 
world single-handedly or a party of companions 
questing onwards to glory. However you wish to use 
it, enjoy your adventures!
Daniel Quinlan, June 2024
To Jane and Arthur,
 for their love and patience


--- PAGE 6 ---

Introduction
5
2 - USING THIS BOOK
We have tried to cover a great many aspects in this 
book, hopefully everything your hero needs to have 
great adventures across Titan and beyond. Although 
each chapter has examples of how to use the rules 
and options provided, because there is so much 
included we are starting with a rough guide to help 
you steer your way around.
The first thing to say - and we will repeat this 
throughout this book - is that these rules and options 
are intended to make your experience of playing the 
game both easier and be8er and as such you should 
always feel free to modify, amend and ignore them as 
you see fit. They are intended to be a source of 
inspiration not a burden!
Chapter by Chapter Summary
In chapter 3 we cover general play guidance, 
difficulty levels and set out a detailed playthrough  
using an example hero. For people who are already 
experienced with using the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy rules much of the play guidance will already 
be familiar, but we do recommend looking through it 
as we have included a lot of additional detail and 
guidance that is not included in the core rulebook. 
It will also help you to understand some of the 
choices we have made later on. Part 3.2 covers 
difficulty levels and how you can make adjustments 
to the encounters and tests your hero will be facing - 
the important thing is that you end up with a game 
that is satisfying for you - and in part 3.3 we set out 
some example heroes and use one of them to do a 
detailed playthrough of some of the systems in this 
book, which will help you to navigate it.
In chapters 4, 5 and 6 we look at creating and playing 
in different types of environments; se8lements, 
dungeons and the wilderness. For each we set out 
ways of building maps and populating them with 
encounters, both combat and non-combat based, and 
discuss specific aspects which are often overlooked 
such as foraging in the wilds or the consequences of 
ge8ing caught by the city Watch, things that will 
bring depth and variety to your adventures.
In chapter 7 we look at social and cultural factors that 
can affect your hero or reflect their ambitions and in 
chapter 8 we provide a variety of rumours & events 
that introduce a feeling of adventuring in a living 
world - many of these options are outside the scope 
of what is strictly required for general play but help 
to make your hero and your world feel more real.
Chapter 9 and 10 deal with two very important things 
- villains and missions. Villains are your enemies and 
opponents, the antagonist against which you must 
fight to prove yourself a hero! Missions (or quests and 
adventures) are your means to do so - a series of tasks 
and encounters that your hero must overcome should 
they wish to face the villain and defeat them. Both 
chapters provide extensive examples for you to use 
and detailed methods to help you create your own 
enemies and quests. 
Chapter 11 details the Adventurers Guild, which is a 
not entirely serious method of introducing some 
smaller quests and rewards, whereas chapter 12 
explains how to assign rewards such as experience or 
social advancement for the missions detailed in 
Chapter 10. Finally, chapter 13 provides you with 
tables that generate random treasure for any monster 
that you defeat.


--- PAGE 7 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
6
Quick Start Guide
For those of you that have a hero prepared and ready 
to go, you can get straight into the action by jumping 
to chapters 9 and 10, which cover villains and 
missions. You can start by finding a villain using table 
9.1.1 ‘Who is your Opponent?’ and then reading the 
description of your enemy to find out what challenge 
they have in store for you by rolling on their 
personalised mission generator table. This will take 
you to table 10.1.1 ‘Campaign Missions’ which will 
provide you with a detailed quest to undertake.
After that, you will need a map. Some of you may 
already have maps you have created, in which case 
you can use chapters 4, 5 and 6 to help you fill in the 
details and generate encounters that include not just 
monsters to fight but also locations to 
discover and social situations to navigate. 
If you do not have a map, fear not! Those 
same chapters include extensive rules 
and guidance on how to build your map, 
with the emphasis on being able to do 
this quickly and with the minimum of 
effort whilst still producing something 
that has the depth and complexity you 
need to bring your world to life.
From this start you can go on to explore 
the book as you like. As you defeat 
monsters you can use chapter 13 to 
generate treasure and loot from the 
monsters you defeat and chapter 12 to 
find out what your hero receives as a 
reward for completing their quests. 
Chapters 9 and 10 show how to create 
more villains and quests and chapters 4, 
5 and 6 will allow you to extend your 
maps indefinitely, whilst chapters 7, 8 
and 11 allow you to add depth and 
variety to both your campaign and your 
hero.
Conclusion
 However you choose to use this book our hope is that 
it becomes an invaluable resource full of ideas, 
options and guidance that can create worlds and 
adventures simply by rolling dice and adding a li8le 
bit of imagination, or by using those resources to 
enhance the places and people (both good and bad) 
that you have already brought to life. Either way, we 
would like you to remember that the aim is to enjoy 
your adventures and the stories you create and 
everything we have provided should be treated in 
that light. If you like it, keep it, and if you don’t then 
change it to suit your needs. However you use the 
adventure creation system, we wish your heroes the 
best of luck with their adventures on Titan and 
beyond.


--- PAGE 8 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
7
3 - GENERAL GUIDANCE
T
his book is intended to be used both as an 
assistant for people in group games and as a 
tool for  solo-play adventures. As with any 
roleplaying 
game 
the 
rules 
are 
subject 
to 
interpretation and in this section we provide some 
ideas about how to handle key situations and some 
reminders about the mechanics of AFF2e.
In group games, the group will decide for themselves 
how to interpret the game rules and how to deal with 
specific situations, with the guidance of the Director. 
This often includes ‘house rules’ and other 
interpretations. We would still recommend reading 
through this section and discussing how you wish to 
play your game before you begin. This is often called 
‘session zero’ and is useful to avoid arguments later 
on.
As solo players do not have access to a Director in this 
section we offer some guidance on how to deal with 
commonly occurring situations. Of course, this is 
simply guidance and as usual we recommend that 
anyone using this book develops their own ideas and 
interpretations, with the aim of enjoying the game as 
much as possible. A solo player may wish to make a 
list of their adjudications at the start of their 
campaign. 
This advice applies to cities, dungeons and the 
wilderness - gathering it in one place means we will 
not repeat it in each section.
It’s your campaign!
The main and overriding piece of advice is this: 
Always remember that this is your adventure and 
your campaign. If you feel that anything in this book 
is wrong, incomplete or unlikely in your se8ing, you 
must change it to be more appropriate. The ideas in 
this book exist to help you, not to act as a 
straightjacket. It’s your campaign!
Rulebooks
This guidebook has been wri8en assuming that the 
reader is familiar with the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy Rulebook. Our aim is to be consistent with 
other published material such as the Combat 
Companion and the Heroes Companion and we 
would encourage you to seek out those books and 
others to expand your options. Although not 
required, it is very much recommended that players 
have access to at least one of the bestiaries such as 
Out of the Pit, Return to the Pit or Beyond the Pit.
Random Rolls vs Choosing
This book contains a large number of tables to 
generate things such as encounters, religious 
preferences, environments, diseases and many, many 
more aspects of gameplay. The intention is that the 
tables cover all the critical aspects you need to create 
your adventures without having to plan them out for 
yourself. However, they are meant to be an aid and 
not a prison! If at any point you should decide that 
you disagree with the result of the roll or have a be8er 
idea, you should feel free to follow your preference.
From Game Book to Role Playing Game
Whilst many people will be coming to this with prior 
experience of RPG’s (Role Playing Games) some may 
come directly from playing the Fighting Fantasy 
‘Choose Your Own Adventure’ gamebooks, or similar 
games and have less experience of how to play RPG’s. 
It is therefore worth explaining a few of the 
differences between a gamebook and a game where 
you are provided with rules and a se8ing.
With a Fighting Fantasy gamebook you, as the hero, 
will be provided with a se8ing (the story of the book), 
an objective (defeat the villain, gather the treasure, 
save the world and so on) and a limited set of rules, 
enough for you to play out the encounters provided. 


--- PAGE 9 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
8
At each stage your choices are your own, but they are 
limited to a small number of meaningful options. 
This combines elements of chance (rolling for combat, 
LUCK and so on) with elements of roleplay - your 
hero can often choose to face a danger, flee from it or 
try some manner of trickery.
In a roleplaying game you are provided with a 
greater number of options and far less direction. The 
rules are provided so that you can resolve conflicts or 
tests (can I beat this monster, can I leap this chasm 
and so on) and it is up to you to decide how you 
apply them. It is also your choice as to how you ‘win’ 
or achieve your aims, or even if you choose to pursue 
them or simply wander. A hero can be a great warrior 
or mage, or try to make their way using social skills 
or deception. You can start an adventure in Port 
Blacksand and then decide to travel to Salamonis 
simply because you wish to (though you should also 
think about the consequences - if you flee from 
danger, does it go away or does it pursue you?).
Because of this ‘open ended’ nature you will need to 
come up with ideas as to what your hero or heroes 
want to do and then find places and encounters that 
suit them. The challenges you meet along the way 
should be resolved using the rules provided in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy gamebook, in which the 
primary mechanic is the development of your 
characteristics (SKILL, STAMINA, LUCK, MAGIC) 
and your special skills (Sneaking, Swords, Magic 
Lore and so on). 
This book provides a wealth of material to help you 
plan out your adventures and map out the world. The 
rules of Advanced Fighting Fantasy provide a 
framework to carry out those adventures. Combine 
these with a bit of imagination and common sense (no 
set of rules can cover every situation!) and you will 
have a fantastic time exploring the world of Titan.
3.1 Guidance on Common Situations
In this section we cover a variety of events and 
situations that occur whilst playing the game and 
provide guidance and additional notes on how to 
deal with them. These should be considered as 
adding on to or clarifying the rules provided in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook. You should 
decide for yourself if you want to use these 
suggestions or create your own rules based on your 
campaign or se8ing.
Types of skill test
Many encounters rely on the use of the main 
gameplay mechanic for Advanced Fighting Fantasy, 
which is the skill test. Whilst full descriptions are 
given in the core rulebook it is worth going over this 
mechanic again to clarify things.  There are three 
varieties of skill test - a straight skill test which is 
rolled against the skill of the hero, an opposed skill 
test and a test against a target number. They are used 
in different ways and ultimately it is up to you or 
your Director to decide which type of test is 
appropriate. Here are some descriptions to help you.
Test of SKILL: The most common type of skill test 
outside of combat, this is used to determine how well 
a hero can perform a specific skill and is done by 
rolling 2d6 and comparing it to the relevant skill, 
hoping to roll less than or equal to your heroes skill 
(remember that in AFF points in a special skill add to 
your SKILL or MAGIC and most skills can be 
a8empted without having extra points assigned). 
Example: Jay ‘Fingers’ Finch has decided to try and 
convince a group of peasants to help him in his quest 
and chooses to give a display of tumbling to impress 
them. Jay has a SKILL of 7 and 1 point in the Acrobatics 
special skill, for a total of 8. Rolling 2d6, Jay scores a 6! 
He has passed the test and his handstands and backflips 
are enough to cheer the crowd and get them to help him. 
If he had failed the test (by rolling 9), he would have 


--- PAGE 10 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
9
slipped and fallen on his face and the crowd would have 
mu3ered and dispersed, leaving him to nurse his pride 
and bruises.
This skill test is the default way of resolving a 
challenge outside of combat and is used very widely 
in Advanced Fighting Fantasy. Some examples 
include:
• To decide if a hero knows something, test a Lore 
skill such as City Lore or Religion Lore
• To help your hero survive in the wilderness test 
skills such as Forest Lore or Mountain Lore
• To spot a concealed or hidden object (such as a 
secret door) test Awareness
• To try and inspire a crowd, test the Leadership 
skill
• Most situations where you aren’t sure if your 
hero can or cannot do something can be resolved 
by testing the relevant skill
Opposed skill test: This is used when both the hero 
and their foe (or foes) are both a8empting to achieve 
a success in their task. Most commonly used in 
combat (the combat roll) and it also applies in any 
situation in which two or more people are competing 
in a task. It is done by having all ‘contestants’ roll 2d6 
and add their skill, then comparing totals. 
Example 1: Jay is chasing a goblin assassin across the 
rooftops - the goblin is a3empting to escape and he is 
trying to close the distance to a3ack him. Jay and the 
Goblin make opposed tests of their Acrobatics skill. Jay 
has SKILL of 7, 1 point in the Acrobatics special skill 
and rolls 2d6 for a disappointing 5 giving a total of 
7+1+5 = 13. The goblin assassin has a SKILL of 6 and 
rolls a 9 for a total of 15! This night the goblin is be3er 
at dancing across the rooftops and, with a last mocking 
gesture of defiance, skips away from Jay and into the 
darkness.
Example 2: Gruder is using his Ba3le Axe to fight a 
Great Orc. Gruder has a SKILL of 7 and 2 points in 
‘Axes’, for a total of 9 skill. Gruder rolls a 6 on 2d6 
making his combat roll 9+6=15. The Great Orc has a 
SKILL of 7 and rolls 7 on 2d6 for a total combat roll of 
14 (most monsters do not have special skills) which 
means that Gruder wins this round of combat and can 
roll 1d6 to see how much damage he does with his Ba3le 
Axe. If the Great Orc had rolled 10 on 2d6 it would have 
a combat roll total of 16 and it would be the Great Orc 
rolling to see how much damage it did to Gruder.
Common examples of using an opposed skill test 
include:
• Resolving combat, the winner of the opposed 
skill test gets to strike their opponent.
• Sneaking past a guard or monster, the hero uses 
their Sneaking skill and the ‘observer’ uses their 
Awareness skill.
• Racing or Pursuing, all involved in a race make 
an opposed skill test to see who is winning.
• All situations in which two or more sides are 
competing with each other directly.
Test against a target number: In some ways, this is a 
version of the opposed skill test, but only the hero 
makes a roll against a predetermined target number. 
It is used when a task is of a certain difficulty that can 
be passed or failed. 
Example: Jay ‘Fingers’ Finch is exploring a dungeon 
when he comes to a deep chasm crossed by a narrow 
bridge, covered in muck and slime. Deciding to push 
forward, Jay a3empts to make a crossing. The bridge is 
slippery - an Acrobatics skill test is needed with a target 
number of 16. Jay has SKILL of 7 and 1 point in the 
Acrobatics special skill. He rolls 2d6 ge3ing 9, for a 
total of 7+1+9 = 17. He has beaten the target number 
and, with a bit of slipping and sliding, has crossed the 
bridge! If he got a total of 15 or less he would currently 
be tumbling toward the bo3om of the chasm. 


--- PAGE 11 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
10
As a guideline, target numbers would be as follows: 
5 or less - a simple task that even a child could do; 10 
or less - a mundane task with a high chance of 
success; 15 or less - a challenging task that requires 
either luck or training to succeed; 20 or more - a 
heroic task that only a great hero will accomplish.
 Common uses of the target number skill test are:
• Coping with an environmental hazard such as 
scaling a cliff or leaping a chasm.
• Dealing with a trap or lock (the be8er quality 
traps or locks have higher target numbers).
• Uncovering a specific piece of information by 
testing a Lore skill.
• Surviving harsh weather such as a great storm 
on a mountainside
Skill test modifiers
In the AFF rulebook a number of skill test modifiers 
are provided in the chapter covering game rules and 
you should look at those for greater details. In 
general, a bonus of +3 is ‘easy’, +6 is ‘very easy’ and 
+9 or more is ‘trivial’. A penalty of -3 is ‘hard’, -6 is 
‘extremely hard’ and -9 or more is ‘almost 
impossible’. These are applied in the obvious way - a 
bonus to a skill test makes it easier to pass, a penalty 
makes it harder.
 If you are unsure, simply make a straight skill test 
and worry about modifiers another time. The more 
you play the game, the be8er you will get at judging 
what is an appropriate modifier.
Refer to the core AFF rulebook for a description of 
each skill and limitations on their use. In general, 
most skills can be a8empted without having any 
points assigned to the special skill. So a hero with 
SKILL of 6 and zero points in Sea Lore could still try 
to pass a Sea Lore skill test, they would need to roll 6 
or less on 2d6.
The main exception to this rule are the ‘Magical’ 
special skills such as Magic-Wizardry or Second 
Sight. These can only be a8empted by heroes that 
have at least one point in the special skill as they are 
considered to be unaware of the flows of magic 
without some training.
It can be difficult to decide which type of test to use 
and if uncertain, a straight test of SKILL is the 
standard position. In addition, it should be 
remembered to apply bonuses or penalties. A hero 
a8empting to use the Disguise skill to make 
themselves look like a peasant would receive a bonus 
- it isn’t hard to look like one of the common folk - but 
a hero trying to impersonate a specific noble should 
understand that a penalty would apply.
Special Skill points Limitation
As an optional but highly recommended rule, we 
have found that the ‘Limited Skills’ rule provided in 
the Advanced Fighting Fantasy Combat Companion 
is very useful and provides a more balanced 
progression for your heroes. The rule is that points in 
any special skill are limited to one half, rounded 
down, of the hero's SKILL (or MAGIC for the 
Knowledge and Magical special skills based on that 
characteristic). This means that a hero with SKILL of  
6 would be allowed to put at most 3 points in their 
Swords special skill until they increase their SKILL to 
7  or 8.  This prevents heroes from becoming too 
specialised in one area; it is particularly relevant for 
combat where a focused warrior can outpace the 
challenges provided in the bestiaries.


--- PAGE 12 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
11
Degrees of Success and Failure: Criticals and 
Fumbles
Advanced Fighting Fantasy is a very straightforward 
system designed to be fast to use. For that reason it 
only has a few degrees of success or failure. If you 
pass a skill test (or beat your opponent in an opposed 
test) you have succeeded, and if you fail, you have 
failed. If you roll double one in or double six you 
have critically succeeded or failed.
Critical success or failure only has a described effect 
for combat or spellcasting. A critical failure when 
casting a spell (the hero rolls two sixes on their 
casting roll) means a roll on the Oops! Table is 
needed. Critical failure on the combat roll is a fumble 
(and you automatically lose the combat round) and 
critical success means your hero can roll on the 
Critical table and maybe do additional damage. Note 
that monsters can also roll criticals and fumbles.
For skill tests (e.g. Sneaking, Acrobatics, Region Lore 
etc - all the non-combat skills) the results of a double 
six or double one are not defined beyond saying that, 
for skill tests, a double six is automatically a failure 
and a double one is always a success. If you wish you 
can interpret them as improved successes or failures. 
A hero that takes a Sneaking test and rolls double one 
(a critical success) might get a larger bonus to a8ack 
a guard, or be able to disarm them before they a8ack. 
A hero that rolls a double six on their Sneaking test 
(critical failure) doesn’t just alert the guard to their 
presence, but also manages to trip over a rock and fall 
flat on their face in front of them.
This is an optional interpretation of the rules, but one 
which adds a nice element of uncertainty to skill tests 
outside of combat.
Additional Skill Descriptions
Aside from the obvious - weapon skills, Sneaking, 
Dodge and so on - there are a few skills that are 
commonly used and are worth describing in addition 
to what is provided in the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy rulebook.
Bargain: Some encounters and locations allow you to 
buy or sell goods and services. Unless the description 
says otherwise, you can a8empt to make a Bargain 
skill roll to alter the price. Rules for using this skill 
and a list of common modifiers are provided in 
Chapter 2 of the AFF Core Rulebook.
The Bargain skill roll is a contested skill roll - if no 
value is given for traders skill, assume they have 
Bargain skill of 7. A successful Bargain test reduces 
the price by 25% (or 50% with a critical success), a 
failed roll increases it by 25% (or 50% for a critical 
failure). Prices should be rounded to the nearest gold 
or silver piece.
For example, if your hero is trying to buy a Long 
Sword at the Weaponsmith (M14). The normal price 
in a city is 30gp (as listed in the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy rulebook).With a successful skill check, done 
as a contested skill test against the weaponsmith, that 
price can be reduced to 22gp, but if you fail the roll 
the price increases to 38gp. Remember to apply the 
modifiers for Social Rank (chapter 7) and other 
modifiers as described in the core rulebook.
For selling items the same rules apply, except that a 
success in the skill test means you increase the 
amount of gold you receive and a failed test reduces 
the amount received.
‘Region’ Lore: Every environment has its own ‘lore’. 
For the sake of this book the world is divided into 
Plains Lore, Forest Lore, Hills Lore, Mountain Lore, 
Tundra & Ice Lore, Desert Lore, Jungle Lore, Marsh 
Lore, Rivers & Lakes Lore, Shorelines and Sea Lore. 


--- PAGE 13 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
12
This is quite a long list of skills! At the discretion of 
the Director, you can substitute a single skill 
‘Wilderness Lore’ which covers all of these. Region 
Lore determines how well the hero understands that 
type of environment. Navigating across the world 
should be done using World Lore and specific actions 
such as hunting and fishing should be done using 
those skills. If you are not certain which skill to use 
whilst out in the wilderness, the Region Lore skill can 
be used as a general ‘survival’ skill that covers most 
bases.
Crafting: Advanced Fighting Fantasy is a game in 
which heroes generally find equipment during their 
adventures or purchase it with the gold they obtain, 
but you may wish to incorporate crafting into your 
campaign. The following categories for crafting are 
suggested, you should feel free to add to or modify 
this list. If you do allow crafting to have an impact on 
gameplay, it is strongly suggested you work out the 
limits in advance. How long does it take to craft an 
item, what tools are needed and what materials 
required are all questions that need answering. A 
hero out in the wilderness cannot easily create a set of 
plate armour without access to a forge, plenty of 
metal and a few weeks of labour!
Crafting: Blacksmithing - Creating metal weapons and 
armour, plus other minor household items such as 
horseshoes, pots and pans and so on.
Crafting: Leatherworking - Create items out of hides, 
furs and other animal products such as teeth or claws. 
Useful in making leather armour, scabbards, 
pouches, quivers, slings, packs, boots and so on.
Crafting: Tailoring - Creating not just items out of cloth 
but also the cloth itself, knowing how to harvest the 
yarn and form it into threads. Tailors produce 
clothing, cloaks, tapestry, embroidery and so on.
Crafting: Woodworking - Almost everyone knows how 
to craft basic items from wood (and which type of 
wood to use) but not all develop that skill to the point 
where they can make complex works of carpentry 
(such as a vaulted ceiling or the prow of a ship). 
Woodworkers also produce arrow shafts, weapon 
hafts, some types of armour (if metal is scarce), 
shields and so on.
Crafting: Victualler (Cooking and brewing) - Often 
overlooked 
by 
a 
careless 
adventurer, 
food 
preparation is a vital skill for survival. Although 
nearly everyone knows enough to prepare food for 
themselves and most know the basics of fermenting 
(even the smallest communities will have some sort 
of brewery), there are some who take their food and 
drink seriously and develop their skills accordingly. 
Crafting: Jeweler/Embellisher - Many people wear some 
form of jewelry, either purely for decoration or as a 
signal of something about their status. These things 
come from specialised crafters who work away 
producing delicately precise pieces from the most 
expensive materials and using the finest tools.
Crafting: Scribing - Amongst the peoples, rates of 
literacy vary enormously but all cultures have some 
that specialise in reading and writing both their 
native script and those of other races. In addition, 
scribes 
will 
learn 
about 
the 
preparation 
of 
parchments and vellums, making inks (or specialised 
brushes and pens) and the creation and maintenance 
of books, tablets or whatever means are used to mark 
words.
Crafting: Inventing - Highly unusual an inventor 
creates, repairs or disables mechanical devices such 
as clockwork, pulleys & levers, spring or torsion 
driven machinery and gunpowder (blackpowder) 
devices if such things are allowed in your campaign. 
Limited by the technology available (no, they cannot 
build a machine gun in most se8ings!)


--- PAGE 14 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
13
Crafting: Jack-of-all-trades: Some people may not wish 
to pursue a specific trade but it is impossible not to 
pick up some knowledge. If a player doesn’t want to 
make a specific choice they can become a jack-of-all-
trades and can a8empt any type of crafting but with 
a -3 skill test penalty.
Dodge as a Universal Skill
Under the rules described in Chapter 3 of the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy book, the Dodge skill can 
only be used to avoid damage in combat if the 
‘Swashbuckler’ talent is taken. We highly recommend 
that the optional rule described in the Combat 
Companion is used - this allows any hero to use the 
Dodge skill in place or armour in combat. The 
Swashbuckler talent instead adds +1 to Dodge skill 
rolls used to mitigate damage.
A hero may try to stop damage using their armour or 
the Dodge skill, but not both. A shield can be 
combined with either.
The reasons for recommending this are simple:
• It seems reasonable that all heroes could learn to 
avoid damage by trying to dodge out of the way.
• It allows for the creation of lightly armoured 
heroic archetypes, such as a barbarian warrior 
dressed in leathers, or an acrobatic elven ranger.
• It allows heroes that cannot wear armour 
(wizards) some chance of avoiding damage.
• It brings the Dodge special skill in line with 
other special skills, which can be used without 
special talents.
Remember that Dodge cannot be combined with an 
armour roll and that heroes that are wearing heavy 
armour (chainmail, platemail) have a penalty to their 
movement skills - a hero in full plate mail is simply 
not as nimble as an unarmoured hero.
Common Encounter and Action Options
Whilst we certainly encourage heroes and Directors 
to come up with their own ideas of how to play the 
game, there is no harm in providing a list of 
commonly used strategies or activities. As well as 
providing inspiration you can refer back to these as 
options for any encounter, provided some common 
sense is applied. It is unlikely, for example, that an 
ogre will stand around waiting for you to finish 
eating your rations before combat begins (though by 
the same token, an honourable opponent might allow 
an injured hero to heal themselves…you will have to 
decide from the description of the encounter).  Many 
of these options are described in greater depth in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook and you should 
refer back to it.
Fight - Fairly obvious, you launch a violent assault 
upon your target. Make sure you have understood 
the rules for combat (the combat roll, damage roll, 
armour or dodge roll etc) provided in the Advanced 
Fighting Fantasy rulebook and then begin. 
Flee -  Fighting to the death might be valorous but it 
is also futile and if a hero is at the point of defeat they 
may choose to flee. To do so they can either test their 
LUCK or risk taking a ‘free hit’.
If they choose to test their LUCK, a success means 
they have used a momentary break in the fighting to 
step away and run (perhaps their opponent trips 
over, or is distracted by inhaling a bee - something 
that gives the hero a few seconds to turn and run). If 
they fail, their opponent blocks their escape and 
combat must continue as normal.
Taking a ‘free hit’ means exactly that - the hero turns 
and runs, knowing that they will get hit as they flee. 
Instead of normal combat their target automatically 
wins the combat round and rolls damage - the hero 
cannot use dodge, armour or a shield to reduce it.


--- PAGE 15 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
14
Once a hero flees, where they end up depends on 
what sort of environment they started in;
• A hero that flees in a se8lement moves to an 
adjacent location and cannot return to the one they 
fled from for the rest of the day.
• A hero that flees in a dungeon moves back to the 
start of their section. If they return within one hour 
the monster will be waiting for them, otherwise it 
will go back to its usual behaviour.
• A hero that flees in the wilderness moves to the 
boundary edge of the area; they spend half a day 
escaping from their encounter and must spend 
half a day moving back to where they were to 
resume their mission or quest.
This may affect the chance to complete a mission; 
such is the price of cowardice!
Use Stealth - Any hero might well be tempted to use 
stealth; sneak up on their opponents and deliver a 
devastating blow before they realise the danger. Of 
course, this is a perfectly sensible idea and even 
without skill points in Sneaking, a hero can test 
against their SKILL to see if they can ambush the 
enemy. However, it is important to remember a few 
things when using this tactic, so it doesn’t become the 
solution to every encounter.
Sneaking is an opposed skill test - the hero rolls 2d6 
and adds their Sneaking skill (or just SKILL if they 
have no additional points) and their target also rolls 
2d6 and adds their SKILL plus any points in 
Awareness. It should never be assumed that the hero 
can automatically sneak up on an enemy.
Modifiers apply! Details are given in the core 
rulebook. Most of the modifiers are penalties, due to 
issues such as lighting or wearing heavy clanking 
armour. Heroes are encouraged to be honest about 
how likely it is they can sneak up on a target - if doors 
or barriers have to be opened it may be impossible, 
sneaking on horseback (whilst travelling in the 
wilderness) is also highly unlikely.
Endurance - a hero choosing to Sneak through a 
dungeon is reasonable, the environment is extremely 
dangerous and distances are short. However, 
choosing to sneak for the whole of a ten day hike 
through a jungle is unreasonable - unless you can 
come up with a very good reason why your hero 
would do this! If you wish to try, you should double 
your travel times and apply a -3 penalty to your 
Sneaking tests to reflect how difficult it is to stalk for 
extended periods of time.
First strike only - unless the hero can come up with a 
very good reason, the bonus for a8acking from 
stealth should apply to the first round of combat only. 
After that, their target should be aware of the a8acks 
and be actively trying to avoid them.
If a hero should manage to sneak up on their target, 
the rules for ambushing set out in the AFF rulebook 
apply. Both the hero and target make a combat roll 
but the ambusher gets a +6 bonus to the combat roll 
and +2 to the damage roll. The victim cannot use their 
shield or dodge skill to avoid damage and if they win 
the combat round they simply avoid damage, but 
don’t get to strike back until the next round.


--- PAGE 16 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
15
Trick - You can a8empt to trick your opponent, they 
generally have to be animals, humanoids or 
intelligent monsters for you to a8empt it. Pick a 
relevant skill and use it to make an opposed skill test 
vs your opponent. Skills such as Sleight of Hand, 
Disguise, Con or Animal Lore are amongst those that 
could be used, but ultimately it depends on the 
situation. Those heroes with access to magic, may be 
able to trick a creature using a spell. If you are 
successful you can avoid dealing with the creature 
you tricked, or get them to take some minor action 
such as wander off a short distance, ignore a door that 
opens and closes and so on. It is unlikely that you can 
trick them into fighting on your behalf or 
undertaking an obviously dangerous action.
Use Etique=e - For encounters with intelligent 
creatures where you have a common tongue in which 
to communicate, you can try to talk to them 
reasonably. Make a test of your Etique8e skill, 
applying any differences in social rank as a bonus or 
penalty. If you succeed, they will behave reasonably 
- this does not make them your friend or ally. If they 
were about to a8ack you, they might let you flee but 
wouldn’t assist you. Etique8e is useful but it is not a 
spell or magical effect!
A=empt a Con - As with Etique8e this requires an 
intelligent creature with which you share a language, 
though this time you are a8empting to lie, threaten or 
misdirect your way out of trouble. Make a test of your 
Con skill (adjusted for differences in social rank) and 
if you succeed you can get them to alter their 
behaviour in a favourable way. This does not make 
them your servant and Con is useful, but not a spell 
or magical effect.
Intimidate - A very specific use of the Con special 
skill, intimidation is an a8empt to frighten your 
opponent and make them flee or submit. You do not 
need to share a language, though your target must be 
capable of understanding the threat. In addition to 
differences in social rank, you must adjust based on 
your SKILL vs the SKILL of your target. If their 
SKILL is higher, apply the difference as a penalty to 
your test. If your SKILL is higher, apply the 
difference as a bonus. A success means they either 
flee or at least not a8ack you. They do not become 
your lackey and this is not a spell or magical effect.
Bribe - Intelligent humanoids (humans, orcs, etc) can 
usually be bribed with gold. The amount required is 
1d6gp for creatures of SKILL 5 or less, 3d6gp for 
creatures of SKILL 6 to 9 and 6d6gp for creatures of 
SKILL 10 or more. If you offer less than this, your skill 
test has a -3 penalty and if you offer double the rolled 
amount your skill test has a +3 bonus. Bribed 
creatures will ‘look the other way’ as you go about 
your activities, but do not become friends or allies. 
Not every creature, even if it is a humanoid, can be 
bribed. A vigilant paladin protecting the doors of a 
temple, for example, will be insulted by such an offer.
Feed - This will require a test of your Animal Lore 
skill. Animals can be offered food instead of money. 
Creatures of SKILL 5 or less need one meal, creatures 
of SKILL 6 to 9 eat 2 meals and for creatures of SKILL 
10 or more 4 meals are needed. If you offer less than 
this, your skill test has a -3 penalty and if you offer 
double the amount your skill test has a +3 bonus. An 
animal that is fed will ignore you for 1d6 hours, 
though it will fight back if a8acked.
Eat a Meal - Stopping and eating a meal (one lot of 
rations = 2 meals) will restore 2 points of STAMINA. 
It is assumed that this rest period lasts between 30 
minutes to an hour and obviously cannot be done 
during combat. A hero can recover STAMINA in this 
way twice per day.


--- PAGE 17 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
16
First Aid - A hero with the Healing special skill can 
make a test after a fight in which they are injured, if 
they succeed they recover 2 points of STAMINA.
Rest - Another way of restoring lost health is to rest 
overnight. A hero that gets a reasonable night's sleep 
(uninterrupted by fighting) restores 4 points of 
STAMINA.
Drink a Potion - Potions of LUCK, STAMINA and 
MAGIC are powerful and important tools and you 
should make use of those that you find. Drinking a 
potion can be done as a ‘free action’ so it doesn’t 
interfere with other things you are doing, provided 
that you have one hand free and that the potion is 
easy to grab or retrieve. If you need to get it out of a 
backpack or put down a shield to grab it, you should 
assume it takes a round to carry this out.
Should I always roll?
With a system based on the use of skills there can be 
a temptation to break things down into tiny actions 
and make skill rolls for everything. We advise against 
that. Skill tests should be used for situations in which 
there is uncertainty about the outcome, a risk of 
failure or of taking damage.
In situations where there is no jeopardy, skill rolls can 
be passed over. For example, if a hero goes to the 
market to buy a tent and some rations before they 
venture into the wilderness, you should not feel 
obliged to roll opposed Bargain skill rolls for this 
purchase. Simply use the prices provided in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook. 
In general, try to remember that the aim is to enjoy 
yourself whilst exploring a world of heroic fantasy - 
don’t get too bogged down in making skill tests!
Basic Encounter Options
From the list above we can come up with a shorter list 
of ‘Standard’ encounter options which you should 
keep in mind. These are:
Table 3.1.1 Standard Encounter Options 
See descriptions in Chapter 3 for more details.
Option  
Action
Fight  
Begin combat and resolve it using the 
normal combat rules, you may use a  
 
ranged weapon or spell in the first   
 
round if you have spo8ed your target.
Flee 
 
Run from combat; test your LUCK to  
 
 
escape or suffer a ‘free hit’.
Sneak  
A8empt to use Sneaking to get past   
 
 
your target, consider what bonuses or 
 
 
penalties apply.
Talk 
 
Use a social skill, you must share a   
 
 
means of communication with your   
 
 
target.
Trick  
A8empt to trick your target in some   
 
 
way, a variety of means including  
 
 
 
magic can be used.
Bribe  
Offer your target an amount of gold to 
ignore your actions.
Feed 
 
Offer an animal food in order to  
 
 
 
distract it.
Ranged Weapons & Magic as a First Strike 
A bow, crossbow or thrown weapon is obviously a 
useful tool for a hero, allowing them to strike from a 
distance before their foe can reach them. A hero that 
equips themself with a ranged weapon is assumed to 
have it to hand when moving about somewhere 
dangerous (which is pre8y much everywhere). As 
such they can use their weapon at the start of the 
combat. 


--- PAGE 18 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
17
It is suggested that heroes are allowed to have one 
round to use magic and missile weapons at the start 
of a combat, provided they have the means to do so 
and the target is not hidden. It is assumed that unless 
the hero has a means to prevent it their target will 
close with them in the next round and they must 
change to use a melee weapon of some kind.
Heroes are encouraged to keep a fair track of 
ammunition. Thrown weapons such as daggers, 
spears etc can be recovered at the end of the fight, 
arrows and bolts must roll 1d6 - they can be 
recovered on a 1 or 2. 
As stated in the rulebook, the round order is Missile - 
Magic - Melee. Spell casters get an advantage in the 
first round of combat when they should be able to 
cast without penalty, but after that they should 
remember that a penalty of -2 or more applies to spell 
casting a8empts when under a8ack.
Using Magic
Heroic, magical fantasy such as Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy would not be complete with wild sorcerers, 
powerful mages and devoted priests hurling magic 
about when the opportunity presents itself. This 
should, of course, be encouraged although it can 
create some challenges for the Director. Even simple 
spells can have surprising applications and working 
out what is allowed or intended can be difficult. In 
general one should encourage the use of magic, as it 
is a key and important part of the system and heroes 
should not feel that it is somehow cheating or unfair. 
On the other hand, in the interests of balance the 
limits of magic use should be remembered. Spell 
descriptions should be read carefully to ensure that 
they are being applied properly.
A hero using spells should be reminded that they will 
need to make a skill test to cast their spell (wizards, 
sorcerers), have a limited number of uses each day 
(priests), have restrictions on their use of armour 
(wizards), need to carry a spellbook (wizards) or use 
components (sorcerers).
The Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook provides 
further details. In addition to these restrictions, which 
are important, heroes and Directors should try to 
apply the spells fairly and with the knowledge that in 
the world of Titan your foes and opponents will not 
be surprised or awed by the use of magic - in fact, 
they will be expecting it!
Avoiding Spells: Many spells allow a test of LUCK to 
avoid the effects. Since creatures do not have a LUCK 
score, use their SKILL instead (if no score is given, use 
that of a similar creature - a peasant would have a 
SKILL of 5, a trained warrior might have SKILL 7 or 8 
- use the creatures in this book and the bestiaries as a 
guide).


--- PAGE 19 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
18
Counterspelling and Dispelling
Wizards have access to ‘Counterspell’ should they 
choose to learn it. This powerful spell has two uses. 
Firstly, the wizard can stop another caster from using 
their magic, though this cannot be used against 
priests as their abilities are not strictly speaking 
spells. It also cannot stop monsters from using 
abilities that are like spells - it only works when 
someone is casting a spell. Secondly, Counterspell 
can be used to dispel active magical effects, so they 
can get rid of spells that have a duration. The wizard 
should be aware of the magic and be able to see it 
working. Not all spells can be dispelled - for example 
the sorcerer spell GOB creates a goblin to fight on 
their behalf, it is ‘real’ once created and cannot be 
removed with a counterspell. 
Dispelling the magic of items and places is also not 
possible (though the Director may allow this use of 
Counterspell if they choose). 
Spell Ranges: Remember that magical effects have 
ranges, usually self, touch or ranged. ‘Self’ spells only 
work on the caster, touch spells require a contact 
which means an unwilling target will have to be 
struck to cast the spell - this can be resolved by 
making a combat roll between the caster and their 
target. The caster gets a bonus of +3 as they are trying 
only to touch their target and not damage them. 
Pu8ing points into the Brawling special skill can 
improve your chance of touching a target. Targets 
that are willing to be touched can be without making 
a combat roll, provided the caster can reach them. 
Ranged spells may have a limit - given in the spell 
description - or be limited by sight. It is generally 
recommended that ‘sight’ also includes a limit of 100 
metres, though this is up to the Director. They can let 
magic users cast spells from one mountain top to 
another if they so wish! The important thing is to be 
consistent. If your hero can do it, so (potentially) can 
your opponent.
Duration
Spells should have their durations listed. In 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy a combat round lasts 10 
seconds, so six combat rounds are one minute.
Area of Effect
Spells that cover an area should have the extent listed 
in the spell description but if you are unsure limit the 
area to 1 metre per point of magical power (Arcane 
Power, Inner Strength, Devotion etc) that the hero 
has. So a Wizard with MAGIC 5 and Magic-Wizardry 
of 3 has an Arcane Power of 8 - if a spell lacks details 
for area of effect allow it to be no larger than a cube 
with sides of 8 metres. This can be useful for limiting 
things such as illusions.
Stacking Spells
It is generally recommended that heroes are not 
allowed to ‘stack’ spells by casting two or more spells 
that have similar effects. So a hero under the effect of 
Ironhand, which increases SKILL by 1 for three 
minutes, should not benefit from having Ironhand 
cast on them again, or having another spell which 
increases SKILL cast on them.
This does not apply to magical items, which is one of 
the reasons they are so powerful.
Casting Spells in Secret: Most uses of magic will be 
obvious to an observer. Wizards gesticulate and 
intone, Sorcerers pull out strange components and 
strain to summon mighty energies, priests call upon 
their gods by reciting parts of their sacred text.
However, there should be some leeway in deciding 
exactly how obvious the use of magic is - a hero that 
wants to a8empt to use a spell with only subtle 
gestures should make a test of their Sleight of Hand 
skill. To avoid speaking too obviously, a test of their 
Con skill should be made. These cannot completely 
mask the use of magic, but will allow a hero to avoid 
arousing the suspicions of an untrained observer. 


--- PAGE 20 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
19
Specific Spell Notes
Spell descriptions should be read carefully and these 
notes are in addition to the text already provided in 
the main rulebook. Not every spell has been covered, 
it is hoped that this extra text will help players and 
Directors to be8er understand how magic works in 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy and apply those 
principles to other spells. Heroes are encouraged to 
be creative with their use of magic.
Minor spells:
A3raction: Makes an unfriendly target neutral and a 
neutral target friendly. It cannot affect hostile targets. 
It requires a sleight of hand roll to successfully cast 
without the target noticing and ge8ing suspicious 
(which would negate the effects of the spell). 
Burn: This spell can only damage the target if the 
character takes them by surprise, has a range of touch 
and does not ignite clothing, items etc that are worn. 
Cool: This will reduce penalties for overheating and 
help resist exposure. 
Dry: Can destroy acid or saliva stopping them 
causing further damage. 
Enhance: Provides a bonus of +3 to your Bargain skill 
roll if your target fails their test of LUCK or SKILL. At 
the end of the duration, they are likely to react badly 
to being tricked. 
Entertain: Can be used in an inn, tavern or drinking 
den once per day to earn 0-10 silver pieces (roll 2d6 
and subtract 2) or provide +1 bonus to an Etique8e 
test made in these locations. 
Extinguish: Note that this will not work on large 
sources of flame or magical flames, but can be very 
useful to extinguish torches or lamps before a 
Sneaking a8empt is made. 
Glimmer: Illuminates the area within arms-reach of 
the caster. 
Hear: Gives a +2 bonus to Awareness tests to overhear 
a conversation. 
Heat: It will reduce any penalty that the character will 
have due to being cold (such as being in the cold 
north) by 2 and help resist exposure. 
Hold: Examples of uses - Stick a weapon: This can 
only be done in the first round of combat. If the target 
fails a SKILL roll, they cannot use that weapon for 30 
seconds. Stick a boot to the ground: If the target fails 
a SKILL roll, they will spend 1 round slipping out of 
the boot. They cannot deal damage if they win the 
round. This can only be done as many times as the 
target has feet with boots on. This is a very versatile 
cantrip and should be limited to small objects.
Honesty: Can be resisted with a test of LUCK (or 
SKILL for NPC’s) and also requires the target to be 
touched. Can be used to ‘unmask’ a disguised 
creature if they fail to resist the spell, revealing their 
true nature. 
Inebriate: Requires touch, see the notes above about 
how to resolve this when the target is unwilling. If the 
target is merely indifferent to the caster, a successful 
Sleight of Hand test can be made to cast this spell 
without anyone noticing. 
Instil: Remember that the consumer of the food or 
drink will still get to test SKILL or LUCK to resist the 
instilled spell.  
Mistake: Gives the target a -1 penalty to any non 
combat skill roll, if they fail the test to resist it. 


--- PAGE 21 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
20
Noise: One use for this spell is as a distraction. If the 
characters are trying to use stealth against someone, 
they can use this spell to get a +1 bonus. There is no 
roll to avoid this as the noises actually exist! 
Pied Piper: At the end of the duration, hostile vermin 
will go back to being hostile. 
Push and slip: If the target fails to resist they suffer a -2 
penalty to combat and movement skill tests. If they 
are near an edge they can test against their SKILL to 
avoid falling over it. 
Repulsion:  Makes an friendly target neutral and a 
neutral target unfriendly. It cannot affect hostile 
NPCs. It requires a sleight of hand roll to successfully 
cast without the target noticing and ge8ing 
suspicious. 
Ripen: Can restore 1 provisions worth or 2 meals 
worth of spoiled food. 
Secrete: Grants a +2 bonus to Sleight of Hand rolls to 
pick a pocket or steal an object no bigger than a gold 
piece. 
Weather protection:
Gives a +3 bonus 
to 
resist 
the 
effects 
of 
bad 
weather such as 
exposure.
Wizard spells:
Befudle: Requires the caster to touch the target, see the 
notes above regarding spells with the touch range. 
Darkness: All participants in combat get a -6 penalty. 
This cannot be reduced by Darkseeing unless the 
creature’s senses depend on something other than 
sight (so animals that rely on hearing or smell might 
have a smaller penalty, those that sense by mystical 
means such as life sensing might be unaffected). 
Glowing eyes: Gives a +2 bonus to intimidation (Con 
special skill) rolls. 
Ignite: Be8er than the burn cantrip because the object 
instantaneously catches fire. Also, it has a range.
Illusion: Can give a +1 bonus to social skill checks and 
stealth checks if the illusion is appropriate. 
Peace: Turns unfriendly NPCs into neutral NPCs. It 
cannot affect hostile NPCs. 
Breach: Can destroy a door or other barrier. 
ESP: Can give a +2 bonus to social skill checks if used 
at the start of the encounter. 
Levitate: Negates any fall damage if the 
characters are prepared to fall (for example, 
jumping into a pit). Note that it doesn’t 
provide flight, only up and down movement. 
Creatures that are dropped from a great height 
(by casting it on them and dropping them) get 
a test of SKILL or LUCK to avoid the spell.
Sentry: The hero cannot be surprised if a 
hostile creature enters the area covered by the 
spell. 
Where’s home? The character gets a +4 bonus to 
navigate to a certain place. 


--- PAGE 22 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
21
Command: The spell can give a 
single opponent a -4 penalty 
in combat for 30 seconds (3 
rounds). 
Explode: 
This 
requires 
5 
minutes per cubic metre, so 
don’t expect to blow any 
opponents up in combat! 
Find: This spell gives a +4 
bonus to skill tests to navigate 
to any place or find any item. 
Fly: Allows the subject to 
automatically succeed at any 
climb or jump roll for 5 
minutes. Also negates any fall 
damage 
as 
long 
as 
the 
character knows the fall is 
coming in advance. A flying 
hero gains +1 to combat rolls 
against an opponent on the ground. 
Grand Illusion: Can give a +2 bonus to social checks 
and stealth checks if the illusion is appropriate.
Sorcery spells:
HOW: If the map is not predetermined, it allows the 
hero to roll the description of the next place they 
move to and then decide if they want to go there or 
choose another path (in other words, they get to 
preview their next move before making it). 
TEL: Can give a +2 bonus to social skill tests, provided 
it is cast before an encounter. 
ZEN: Allows the subject to automatically succeed at 
any climb or jump roll as long as the sorcerer 
concentrates on the spell. Also negates any fall 
damage as long as the character knows the fall is 
coming in advance. 
KID: Grants a +1 bonus to 
social 
checks 
and 
stealth 
checks 
if 
the 
illusion 
is 
appropriate. 
ZIP: The character can escape 
combat without taking a hit. 
FAR: The character can make 
an encounter roll before it 
happens and then choose to 
avoid it.
Priestly Powers:
Commune: After a sleep, the 
character can get a +2 bonus to 
their next knowledge skill roll. 
Sanctuary: For the duration, 
the hero does not suffer any 
damage from weather. 
Libra’s power: You may make the roll to see if someone 
is deceiving the hero before you decide what to do. 
Usrel’s power: No combat can take place in the zone 
and no a8acks can be made to deliberately target into 
the zone. 
Verlang’s power: The hero can use the power to 
identify any metal object – they can roll up its 
properties before they use it or pay for someone to 
identify it. 
Fulkra’s power: Acts as the Where’s Home? Spell for 
one predetermined destination. 
Decay’s power: This power can destroy one non 
magical weapon or piece of armour that an opponent 
is using.


--- PAGE 23 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
22
Using LUCK
LUCK is a powerful and unique resource in 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy and heroes should make 
use of it, though always remembering that it is 
difficult to recover points of LUCK. It has a variety of 
uses, for example:
• A hero that loses a round of combat can test 
LUCK to force a ‘roll’ of 1 for a damage roll against 
them.
• A hero that wins a round of combat can test 
LUCK to deal the maximum damage that a8ack 
could normally do.
• Test their LUCK instead of making a skill test.
• Elect not to use LUCK. Some spells or effects 
state ‘a hero must test their LUCK’ but if the 
Director allows it, they should be given the option 
to fail the LUCK test and suffer the effects.
• Use their LUCK to avoid the effects of a spell, 
poison or disease. Even if not stated in the text it 
should be assumed that a successful test of LUCK 
means the hero is unharmed.
Playing the Monsters
Whether playing solo or as part of a group, someone 
has to take charge of the monsters and decide what 
they are going to do. By monsters, we mean not just 
the obvious threats such as a skeleton set to guard a 
tomb, but also intelligent humanoids, animals, 
demons, creatures of chaos and so on. It’s up to you 
how you ‘play’ the monsters, but there are some 
general factors to think about which can help you 
decide what they do. The game will be more 
interesting if your monsters act in interesting ways - 
if they all simply stand there waiting to be hit, 
encounters will become boring.
Some of the factors to consider are:
• Is the creature friendly, neutral, unfriendly or 
hostile? If you cannot alter this using a skill or 
spell, they will act accordingly. Friendly creatures 
will try to help you and won’t fight unless 
a8acked. Neutral creatures will ignore you unless 
you disturb them in some way (move into their 
lair, take their belongings etc) or you can persuade 
them to be helpful. Unfriendly creatures will try to 
hinder you, but will not a8ack if they have some 
other way to cause problems. Hostile creatures are 
out for blood and will a8ack on sight. If no 
indication is given in the monster description, base 
its a8itude on the monster type.
• How intelligent is the creature? Broadly you can 
split them into stupid, average and smart. Stupid 
monsters will behave in obvious, predictable ways 
and continue with their actions even if they aren’t 
really working. Averagely intelligent monsters 
(such as humans, orcs, goblins and so on) will 
react to your actions with intelligent responses. If 
you fire an arrow at an orc, for example, it will 
either retreat to cover or charge at you - it won’t 
simply stand there and wait for you to fire again! 
Smart monsters will not just react but also try to 
predict your moves and come up with their own. 


--- PAGE 24 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
23
This is a challenge for a Director or 
solo player, but the important point is 
that 
they 
don’t 
do 
anything 
obviously stupid - vampires, for 
example, don’t go into the sunlight 
unless forced to do so!
• What sort of monster is it? We can 
divide our monsters into a number of 
categories such as humanoid, animal, 
undead, demonic, elemental and so 
on. An animal that is a8acked might 
try to flee, but an undead almost 
certainly won’t. A humanoid can be 
reasoned with, but an elemental will 
probably ignore you (even if it 
understands your language).
• How powerful is it? A goblin is 
more likely to flee than an ogre. In 
general the higher the SKILL of the 
monster (or MAGIC for spell casters) 
the stronger it is. So if you have 
SKILL 8 and meet a giant with SKILL 
10, it won’t see you as a huge threat!
• Where is it? A monster that is 
encountered in or near its lair is more 
likely to stand its ground and fight 
then if encountered elsewhere. This is 
particularly true for humanoids and 
animals, both of which tend to be 
territorial, but can apply to others. A 
skeleton that has been set to guard a tomb might 
not go past the boundaries set for it.
• What senses does it use? Undead, for example, 
are generally assumed to have the ability to sense 
the presence of the living making it difficult to 
sneak past them. Animals might use smell, touch 
or hearing as their primary sense.
• What equipment and items does it have to hand? 
Natural creatures such as rats or snakes won’t 
have 
equipment 
but 
intelligent 
monsters, 
particularly humanoids, will have weapons and 
armour. You should use some common sense - a 
lowly goblin might have a handaxe and a leather 
cuirass and is extremely unlikely to be wearing 
platemail. On the other hand the leader of an orc 
tribe could easily be wielding a mighty ba8leaxe 
and wearing a breastplate or a chain hauberk.
Another way of looking at it is to talk about the 
monsters by type and generalise from that.


--- PAGE 25 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
24
Table 3.1.2 Monster Type
Type 
 
Typical Behaviours (read the monsters descriptions to get a fuller picture).
Humanoids 
Humanoids tend to be at least reasonably smart, social, territorial and afraid of dying. This means 
that social skills can be used, even with hostile creatures (though a penalty of -3 to -6 may apply 
to the test). Most humanoids rely on sight, so their lairs are likely to be illuminated in some way 
and they will usually try to defend them. Humanoids also fight as groups and employ tactics 
such as using ranged weapons, se8ing ambushes, building traps and so on.
Animals 
There is a huge range of animals, in general they have at least some ability to think and will 
usually fight to defend a lair or their young. They can be tricked, especially with food and their 
combat tactics come down to fight or flee. Animals use a variety of senses and most don’t light 
their homes or arrange their possessions. Most animals are neutral or unfriendly.
Undead 
With a few exceptions the undead are of low intelligence, hostile to the living, fearless and 
capable of sensing nearby life (though one may give them normal senses if you prefer). For the 
most part they will a8ack as soon as possible and not relent until destroyed.
Great Beasts Creatures such as dragons, hydras, bloodbeasts and others with high SKILL and STAMINA can 
be assumed to be more cunning, proud and vicious than other animals. They are used to being 
top of the food chain and will act accordingly, which generally means a8acking on sight.
Demons 
Demons vary enormously as they have their own sinister purposes, but they also generally hate 
mortals and wish to make them suffer. They are often intelligent or very intelligent and will use 
tactics and strategy in combat. They may flee if they are overpowered and some can be bargained 
with (though never fairly). Demons' senses often include darkvision or the ability to sense nearby 
life.
Elementals 
Elementals are not innately hostile or friendly to mortals. Generally their reactions are based on 
what the mortals are doing. In particular, if their activities are interfered with or even if mortals 
venture into their territory, they will become hostile. Elementals vary in intelligence from barely 
capable of thought to highly intelligent; their senses are wildly different to our own and based on 
their particular form. They will generally ignore social skills or bribery.
Other  
For other monsters you will need to look at the description given in the bestiary and try to work 
out its behaviours based on what you read. If it is helpful, compare it to some of the examples 
given above. For example a Brain Slayer could be considered as a humanoid / demon in its 
behaviour.


--- PAGE 26 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
25
Death and dying
Titan is a dangerous world full of monsters, traps and 
villains. If you are playing fairly, you might find that 
your hero runs out of luck (and LUCK) and dies. 
There are two possible ways of dealing with this 
situation.
• Try again with a different hero
Although one hero has fallen, another can rise up 
to take their place. Go back to the character 
creation process and start again, perhaps with a 
different choice of skills and abilities. It will be up 
to you to decide if this new hero has any 
connection with the deceased, or is a completely 
fresh character. If you decide there is a connection, 
you may let your new hero pick up where the old 
one finished and carry on with whatever quests or 
missions you were undertaking.
• The gods intervene
Just as you fall in ba8le and exhale your last, you 
hear the cry of voices, by chance another group of 
adventurers come to your salvation at the last 
moment. They gather you up and escort you out of 
danger to a temple (place your character on the 
nearest Temple on the map).  You are grievously 
wounded but the priests agree to patch you up 
and heal you..in return for a suitable donation of 
course.
If you take this option, there is a price to be paid. 
As a ‘donation’ to the temple that saved you, you 
must give away all your gold and items apart from 
one non-magical weapon (or spellbook if you are 
a magic user), one set of non-magical armour, 
your backpack (containing normal everyday items 
such as a bedroll and so on) and 2d6 gold pieces. 
Reduce your LUCK by three points! In addition, 
you carry the mark of having passed so close to the 
abyss.
Table 3.1.3 - Mark of Death
Roll 
Mark
1 
You have received a terrible scar, which gives 
 
you a distinct appearance. You suffer -1 to   
 
your Disguise special skill.
2 
Your body is traumatised and more sensitive  
 
to shocks. If you are poisoned, suffer 1 point  
 
of additional damage.
3 
The brush with death has weakened your   
 
immune system. If you are suffering from a   
 
disease, uncontrollable shivering causes you a 
-1 penalty to all physical skill tests until you  
 
are cured.
4 
No ma8er how much you exercise, you have  
 
lost something of your previous vigour. You  
 
suffer -1 to your Strength special skill.
5 
Your ordeal has left you shaken - literally.   
 
Your hands have a noticeable tremble. You   
 
suffer -1 to your Sleight of Hand special skill.
6 
You suffer no outward consequences, but  
 
 
your dreams are haunted by dark shadows.  
 
Spooky.


--- PAGE 27 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
26
Treasure & Encumbrance
It is worth reminding ourselves of how encumbrance 
works in Advanced Fighting Fantasy, as it can be 
tempting to pick up everything that is found in a 
dungeon or whilst out in the wilderness and haul it 
all back to the market for a large reward.   
Advanced Fighting Fantasy uses an abstract system 
to show when a hero is carrying too much. A hero 
may carry 10 normal sized items plus an extra 1 for 
each point in the Strength skill. The total does not 
include worn armour, clothing or a backpack.
Larger items count as two or more items and small 
items such as arrows count as one when a bundle or 
stack of them are carried (in a quiver or pouch for 
example). One hundred very small items - such as 
coins - count as one item.
A hero carrying more than their limit is encumbered; 
they move at half pace and will suffer penalties to 
skill tests including combat. A hero cannot carry 
more than double their normal allowance.
Pack animals such as mules, donkeys or horses can be 
considered to have 20 encumbrance slots, provided 
they are equipped with saddlebags and the like in 
which to store items. Very large animals will have 
more - if your hero has managed to purchase an 
elephant and bring it with them on their adventures, 
they should be able to load it up with 60 
encumbrance slots worth of items. 
Of course, they must remember to feed and water 
their animals if they want them to survive the trip.
Keeping track of time
Throughout this book there will be missions and 
effects that refer to the passage of time. Details of the 
Titan calendar are given in the sourcebook ‘Titan’ 
and it can be very helpful to use this to keep track of 
how time is passing. For those without the book they 
can divide a year into twelve months of thirty days 
each, with seven days in a week.
Not everyone enjoys keeping an accurate track of 
time as they adventure and time can be managed in 
an abstract way - simply stating that ‘some days or 
weeks’ passes between adventures. The choice is up 
to you, though it is worth noting that many of the 
rules provided in this book assume that a reasonably 
accurate track of the date is kept.
Many people who play campaigns like to keep track 
of time and adventure progress by creating a journal 
which records their activities.
As a reminder a ‘round of combat’ in Advanced 
Fighting Fantasy lasts 10 seconds. 


--- PAGE 28 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
27
Other rules and modifiers
The Advanced Fighting Fantasy core rules and 
companion books contain many rules and ideas 
regarding movement, combat, spellcasting, healing 
etc. It is assumed that anyone using this book will be 
familiar with the rules of Advanced Fighting Fantasy 
and have decided which core and optional rules they 
intend to apply. 
It is recommended that players seek out books such 
as the Heroes Companion, Combat Companion and 
the bestiaries as they offer a wide range of expanded 
options for skills, magic, classes, equipment and 
more which can alter your game in interesting and 
exciting ways.
Some Important definitions
Throughout this book we will give some words very 
specific meanings, either as part of our map creation 
or as part of the mission system. A longer glossary of 
terms is provided in section 3.4 but some of the most 
common terms used in this book are worth 
familiarising yourself with from the start.
Se=lement - a city, town or village. Any place 
where many people (not just humans but dwarves, 
elves, lizardmen and so on) gather and make 
shelter.
Location - the places within this se8lement; i.e. the 
inn, temple, keep and so on. This is not just one 
building, but a district within your se8lement 
which has a notable building or function for which 
it is known.
Area - part of the wilderness which has a broadly 
uniform environment occupying a distinct part of 
your map. Maps are often broken into areas of 
about 10 miles across.
Dungeon - a series of connected rooms inside a 
larger 
structure, 
not 
always 
underground. 
Dungeons can be divided into smaller sections. 
Dungeons often have a theme or an overall 
controller who is in charge of the dungeon.
Section - a small part of a dungeon consisting of 
6+1d6 or more rooms. Breaking a dungeon into 
sections makes it more manageable.
Social skills - Usually Etique8e, Con, Leadership, 
Bargain but may include others which involve 
social interaction rather than combat or physical 
action. If you are using the system for Social Rank 
this will apply modifiers to your social skill tests.
Social Rank - a measure of your standing in 
society based on how your hero is regarded by 
their peers, this optional mechanic is described in 
Chapter 7.
Encounter - a randomly generated encounter, 
usually based on the location, area or dungeon 
level and divided into social, challenge or map 
encounters 
whilst 
in 
a 
se8lement. 
Social 
encounters can usually be dealt with peacefully, 
challenge encounters require you to use your skills 
to avoid harm and map encounters add a location 
to your map.
NPC - a Non Player Character,  refers to a 
humanoid, monster or creature that may think 
and plan out their actions instead of reacting 
instinctively to the situation. Their actions are 
determined by the Director based on factors such 
as their intelligence, type, desires and morality (if 
any).
Mission - a task or set of tasks that has to be 
completed to either gain a reward or to thwart 
your opponent, also can be referred to as a quest 
or adventure.


--- PAGE 29 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
28
Table 3.1.4 - Random Wilderness Area finder
The area you are looking for lies 3+1d6 areas away in the following direction..roll 1d6 three times.
Roll 1d6 (Reroll 5 or 6) to find a column then..
Roll 1d6 (Reroll 5 or 6) 
to find a direction. 
 
 
 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4
 
1 
 
 
 
 
North  
 
 
North East
 
2 
 
 
 
 
East 
 
 
 
South East
 
3 
 
 
 
 
South  
 
 
South West
 
4 
 
 
 
 
West 
 
 
 
North West
For example: If you roll a 2, followed by a 4 then a 3, the random wilderness area lies 5 areas away (50 miles) in the South 
West direction. A roll of 4, 2 and 2 would mean it lies 7 areas away (70 miles) to the East. 
In a dungeon a random room can be found by 
dropping a dice onto your map and choosing the 
room that is nearest to the where the dice lands. You 
can of course choose the most appropriate room for 
the encounter - if it happens to be the lair of a 
significant enemy, pick a room that is near to the end 
of the dungeon section.
Summary
No set of rules can cover every situation and every 
interpretation of events. The important thing is that 
you find a method of playing that is enjoyable and 
feels right to you and other people in your group. 
Hopefully the guidance in this section will help to 
resolve any disagreements and provide ideas you can 
use to make your games run smoothly.
Opponent / Villain - the evil mastermind who 
you have decided to pit your skills against to 
prove your worth as a hero. Could also be referred 
to as your adversary, nemesis, sworn enemy and 
so on.
Henchman - a person who works for your 
opponent, often sent to harass or intimidate you.
Finding a random location / area / room
Many of the missions require you to find a random 
place or your map - a random location in the city, 
random area in the wilderness or random room in a 
dungeon. There are a number of methods for doing 
this. The usual method is to drop or roll a dice onto 
your map and see where it ends up - if it goes off the 
map, roll it again. The place you want is the one 
under the dice, if it se8les on a boundary line then use 
your judgement to decide where you are going.
The second method applies to cities only -  use the 
‘Random Location’ numbers on the locations table 
4.1.5 - roll a 1d6 twice and refer to the numbers in that 
column - a roll of 3 followed by a 2 would be the 
Hospital. A roll of 5 followed by a 4 would need to be 
rerolled as there is no 5.4 on the list. For locations 
with more than one appearance (Inns for example) 
either roll again or use your judgement to decide 
which one is most appropriate.


--- PAGE 30 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
29
3.2 Difficulty Level
One of the most challenging aspects of writing an 
adventure guide is se8ing the level of difficulty, as 
there are a large range of possible users ranging from 
a player with li8le experience of role playing games 
controlling a lone hero to a group of players with 
years of experience managing a well balanced party 
of hardened adventurers.
The encounters in this book are wri8en with the 
intention of providing a challenge for a hero that has 
been created according to the rules set out in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook. They will have 
started with eight improvement points - as described 
in the AFF rulebook a hero starts with SKILL 4 
STAMINA 8 LUCK 8 MAGIC 0 and receives eight 
points to improve their characteristics (along with 
some points in special skills and their talents).  As 
your hero improves, using the experience point 
system in the AFF rulebook, they will gradually 
outpace the encounters.
You will have to decide for yourself if you are finding 
the encounters and skill tests too easy or too hard, 
and how this affects your enjoyment of the game. 
Fortunately, adjusting the difficulty can be done with 
a few easy alterations - here are some tips on how you 
can do it.
Simple Method of Adjusting difficulty
Advanced Fighting Fantasy is a robust and 
straightforward system and simple adjustments can 
be used to alter the difficulty of skill tests and combat 
encounters.
• If you are finding skill tests too easy, impose a 
significant penalty such as -2 to represent a ‘tough 
world’ scenario. If you are finding them too hard, 
give yourself a +2 ‘beginners luck’ bonus.
• When you use a table to generate an encounter 
or challenge, roll twice and pick the one that best 
suits your level of play.
• If you are playing as a group of heroes you may 
want to have only one hero make skill tests ‘for the 
group’ for encounters that require you to test non-
combat skills such as Region Lore, Etique8e, 
Leadership and so on. This will depend on the 
encounter. You can also allow other heroes to 
assist, if it makes sense, and add a bonus to the 
test.
• If you are finding combat too easy, give your 
opponents a bonus to their SKILL and STAMINA, 
if you are finding it too hard apply a penalty.
• If encounters are too easy, increase the number 
of opponents you face. If they are too hard, 
substitute the listed encounters for some that have 
lower SKILL or STAMINA.
•  If you are fighting creatures or villains that use 
magic, either increase or decrease the number of 
spells they cast. Spells that cast more magic points 
are generally stronger.
• If you are playing as a group of heroes, often 
called a party, increase the number of creatures or 
monsters you fight to match the size of your party 
(so if you have a group of three heroes, instead of 
encountering one goblin in a dungeon you meet a 
group of three). One exception to this rule would 
be when facing particularly powerful opponents, 
sometimes called bosses, when you should 
instead increase their STAMINA, SKILL or give 
them a bonus to skill test rolls including the 
combat roll. 


--- PAGE 31 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
30
Adjusting Difficulty Based on Hero ‘Grade’
In the AFF Combat Companion rules are provided for 
creating heroes of different grades, from civilian to 
champion. If you are using these rules, we suggest the 
following modifiers based on our experience, though 
again it must be stated that every group will need to 
find a level they are comfortable with.
Table 3.2.1 Encounter Adjustment by Hero Grade
Hero   
Improvement   
Maximum 
 
Suggested adjustments applied to
Grade   
Points   
 
SKILL / MAGIC  
the monster characteristics or skill tests
 Civilian  
2 
 
 
4 / 2 
 
 
Monsters have -2 SKILL, -2 STAMINA, 
skill rolls have a +2 ‘beginners luck’ bonus.
Novice  
5 
 
 
5 / 5 
 
 
Monsters have -1 SKILL, -1 STAMINA, 
skill rolls have a +1 ‘beginners luck’ bonus.
Competent 
7 
 
 
6 / 6 
 
 
-1 STAMINA
Veteran 
8 
 
 
7 / 7 
 
 
Hero as created in the AFF Rulebook. 
No adjustment.
Expert  
9 
 
 
8 / 8 
 
 
Monsters have +1 SKILL, +3 STAMINA
Master  
10 
 
 
9 / 9 
 
 
Monsters have +2 SKILL, +4 STAMINA
Champion  
11 
 
 
10 / 10  
 
Monsters have +2 SKILL, +5 STAMINA


--- PAGE 32 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
31
Using Monster Templates
In 
the Advanced 
Fighting 
Fantasy 
Combat 
Companion, rules are provided for ‘monster 
templates’ which provide toughened versions of 
ordinary monsters based on their roles. For example 
a ‘berserker’ gets +1 SKILL, +2 Damage rolls and uses 
a two-handed weapon, whereas a ‘scout’ gets +1 
SKILL, 3 points in the Sneaking special skill.
Adding these templates to your monsters provides 
extra variety and challenge. For more examples and a 
fuller explanation of how to use templates, look at the 
rules in the Combat Companion, but a small number 
can be quickly generated to add extra challenge to 
encounters.
Table 3.2.2 Simple Monster Templates - for more extensive rules see the AFF Combat Companion
1d6  
Simple Template
1 
 
Berserker - monster a8acks with wild ferocity. +1 SKILL, +2 Damage rolls.
2 
 
Scout - monster is smart and sneaky. +1 SKILL, 3 points in Sneaking skill. Will a8empt to ambush.
3 
 
Veteran - monster is toughened by combat. +2 STAMINA and +1 Armour or Dodge roll.
4 
 
Large - monster is bigger than usual. +2 STAMINA and +1 Armour roll.
5 
 
Toughened - monster is very hardy - reduces all damage by 1 point of STAMINA.
6 
 
Powerful - monster hits hard - increase all damage caused by 1 point of STAMINA.
Selecting Monsters and Group Size
Due to constraints of space we have only been able to 
make use of a fraction of the monsters available in 
AFF and by necessity we have focused on creatures 
that will challenge the ‘veteran’ hero made using the 
normal hero creation rules. If you have started at a 
different grade and you have access to the bestiaries, 
you may want to select monsters that are more 
appropriate to your hero grade. 
Similarly, encounters have been wri8en with solo 
heroes in mind. When playing with a group of heroes 
the outnumbering bonus (+1 to combat rolls for every 
extra a8acker) quickly becomes decisive and whilst 
the simple solution is to increase the number of 
monsters that you face, an alternative is to find 
monsters that have a higher level of SKILL to begin 
with.
So, for example, a Caveman (Out of the Pit) has 
SKILL 7 STAMINA 7, meaning he would be a decent 
fight for a competent hero, easy for a veteran and 
trivial for an expert or master. If however we have 
two novice heroes they should be able to take it on 
and two competent heroes will treat it as fairly 
routine. If the tables are turned and we have two 
cavemen fighting one hero this will now be 
somewhat difficult for our veteran and might well be 
beyond our competent or novice heroes, who could 
find themselves easily beaten.
All of this has to be considered alongside other 
monster abilities such as additional a8acks (which 
are very powerful against a lone hero as they add +2 
to the monster's combat roll) or special abilities such 
as flight, poison and so on.
All in all, using the bestiaries to come up with a wider 
variety of monsters is hugely encouraged and you 
will find that the more you use them, the be8er you 
become at choosing appropriate combatants.
Once again it must be stressed that this can only ever 
be taken as guidance. The choices you make when 
creating a hero, the availability of magical items, the 
experience you have with Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy or other games will all play into the difficulty 
level you experience when adventuring. 


--- PAGE 33 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
32
3.3 Example Play Guide
Whilst we have endeavoured to make this book as 
clear and readable as possible, it is always helpful to 
have examples of how rules and advice are intended 
to be used. We have included some in the text of each 
chapter and in this section we provide a longer 
example of a mission play through which should give 
you a clearer understanding of what was intended.
Step 1: Create a Hero
Throughout this book you’ll come across a number of 
heroes that we have created in order to illustrate the 
rules and ideas presented and help to communicate 
our intentions. All these heroes have been made 
using the standard hero creation rules given in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rules and cover a variety 
of types and backgrounds. For those of you who are 
interested, the character details are given here.
Gruder
Possibly part ogre, Gruder is a huge man with a love of the alehouse and ba8le but who is just smart enough to 
know when to get out. Gruder always looks out for number one!
SKILL  
7
STAMINA 
16
LUCK  
10
MAGIC 
0
Talent  
Strongarm
Special Skills
World Lore - 1, Mountain Lore - 1, Religion Lore - 1, Swim - 1, Common - 4, Axes - 
2, Strength - 2, Armour - 2, Climb - 1, Brawling - 1, Ride - 1, Jump - 1, Dodge - 1, 
Awareness - 1
Equipment
Ba8le Axe, Breastplate, Lantern & Flask of Oil, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of STAMINA.
Other
If Gruder is reduced to 4 Stamina or less he will a8empt to leave the fight. He doesn’t think dying is heroic in 
the slightest!
Table 3.2.3 Monster Selection by Hero Grade and Group Size
Hero Grade  
Max 
 
 
Suggested Opponent 
 
Heroes > Monsters 
Monsters > Heroes
SKILL / MAGIC 
SKILL Ranges  
 
SKILL ranges  
SKILL ranges
Civilian  
4 / 2 
 
 
2-4 
 
 
 
3-5 
 
 
1-3
Novice  
5 / 5 
 
 
3-6 
 
 
 
4-7 
 
 
2-5
Competent 
6 / 6 
 
 
4-7 
 
 
 
5-8 
 
 
3-6
Veteran 
7 / 7 
 
 
5-9 
 
 
 
6-10 
 
 
4-8
Expert  
8 / 8 
 
 
6-10 
 
 
 
7-11 
 
 
5-9
Master  
9 / 9 
 
 
7-11 
 
 
 
8-12 
 
 
6-10
Champion  
10 / 10  
 
9-13 
 
 
 
10-14  
 
8-12


--- PAGE 34 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
33
Jay ‘Fingers’ Finch
A small man with darting eyes and hands, Jay Finch prefers to keep to the shadows. He is more at home in the 
city than the wilderness, but will go wherever there is a chance for profit.
SKILL  
7
STAMINA 
14
LUCK  
11
MAGIC 
0
Talent  
Trapmaster
Special Skills
World Lore - 1, City Lore - 1, Religion Lore - 1, Acrobatics - 1, Common - 4, Sneaking - 2, Awareness - 2, Sleight 
of Hand - 2, Swords - 1, Evaluate - 1, Climb - 1, Locks - 1, Dodge - 1, Trap Knowledge - 1
Equipment
Short Sword, Lantern & Flask of Oil, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of LUCK.
Other
Jay has a love of things bright and shiny, and can’t resist the opportunity to pilfer them when he gets close 
enough. When his skills let him down his luck comes to the rescue.
Skurl Glintscale
A Black Elf, Skurl is always in search of new magical knowledge to study. She has travelled a long way from her 
desert home to find new spells and enchantments.
SKILL  
4
STAMINA 
10
LUCK  
8
MAGIC 
8
Talent  
Dark Seeing, Arcane
Special Skills
Desert Lore - 1, Magic (Minor) - 2, Elvish - 4, Common - 2, Magic Wizardry - 2 (Arcane Power 10), Magic Lore - 
2, Second Sight - 2, Staves -1, Awareness - 1, Dodge - 1, Etique8e - 1, City Lore - 1
Equipment
Spellbook, Staff, Lantern & Flask of Oil, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of STAMINA.
Other
Skurl has dedicated her life to the search for magical knowledge and will try to pursue this aim even if it puts 
her friends in danger. She feels terrible about this, but still thinks it’s worth the risk!


--- PAGE 35 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
34
Initiate Zadi Kellist
A Dwarven priest of Throff, Zadi Kellist has gone out to discover new and wondrous caverns which she intends 
to document and share with other dwarves and explorers.
SKILL  
6
STAMINA 
12
LUCK  
9
MAGIC 
4
Talent  
Dark Seeing, Blessed
Powers  
Create food/water, Sanctuary, Heal and Throff’s special power: Earthquake.
Special Skills
Underground Lore - 2, Crafting - 1, Dwarfish - 4, Common - 2, Armour - 2, Clubs - 2, Magic-Priestly - 2 (Devotion 
6), Healing - 1, Strength - 1, Religion Lore - 1, Climb - 1, Awareness - 1
Equipment
Mace, Leather Hauberk, Large Shield, Lantern & Flask of Oil, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of STAMINA, 
Holy Symbol, Robes (worn under the armour).
Other
Zadi has a love of the underground and is miserable if forced to spend too long above ground. Given a choice, 
she will always try to steer her friends towards exploring under the earth where it might be possible to spend a 
day or two exploring an unknown cave.
Wyrdly Dume
Wyrdly is an orphan that was found wandering in the desert, near death, by a caravan of traders. He stayed with 
them for several years as a guard and trader before leaving to discover his fate. He has grown into a wild eyed 
human that struggles to control his powers and often travels alone.
SKILL  
5
STAMINA 
14
LUCK  
9
MAGIC 
4
Talent  
Fast Healer
Spells  
As with all sorcerers, Wyrdly has access to any spells for which he has the correct components.
Special Skills
World Lore - 1, Desert Lore - 1, Religion Lore - 1, Swim - 1, Common - 4, Polearms - 2, Armour - 2, Magic-Sorcery 
- 2 (Inner Strength 6), Con - 1, Ride - 1, Awareness - 1, Second Sight - 1, Magic-Minor - 1, Bargain - 1
Equipment
Halberd, Leather Cuirass, Lantern & Flask of Oil, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of STAMINA, One Giant 
Molar, bamboo flute, nose plugs, a galehorn and a small stone.
Other
Wyrdly is very loyal to his friends but is obsessed with finding answers to his own origins; he will seek to 
investigate any sources of magical power no ma8er how dangerous they may be.


--- PAGE 36 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
35
Janay the Just
Janay Holiver is a priestess of Libra, passionately dedicated to spreading ideas of Justice in an uncivilised world, 
hopefully by persuasion. She is trying to balance her abilities as a preacher with her qualities as a warrior.
SKILL  
5
STAMINA 
10
LUCK  
10
MAGIC 
5
Talent  
Solid Defence
Powers  
Ward, Protection vs Criminals, bandits etc, Healing and Libra’s special power: Detect Lies
Special Skills
World Lore - 1, City Lore - 1, Religion Lore - 2, Ride - 1, Common - 4, Swords - 2, Armour - 2, Magic-Priestly - 2 
(Devotion 7), Etique8e - 1, Leadership - 1, Awareness - 1, Healing - 1, Law - 1
Equipment
Sword, Large Shield, Leather Cuirass, Lantern & Flask of Oil, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of STAMINA.
Other
Janay prefers converts to corpses. If she believes it possible, she will try to convince her enemies to drop their 
weapons and join the cause of good, taking the ‘Defensive’ combat option and talking sternly to them. 
D’Sta Leafshadow
An elven ranger, D’Sta has decided to spend some time exploring the world and improving his talents as a 
warrior and scout. Physically capable, he is somewhat naive in the ways of the world.
SKILL  
7
STAMINA 
16
LUCK  
9
MAGIC 
1
Talent  
Dark Seeing, Combat Reactions
Special Skills
Forest Lore - 1, Magic (Minor) - 1, Elvish - 4, Common - 2, Swords - 2, Bows - 2, Armour - 2, Ride -1, Awareness 
- 1, Dodge - 1, Climb - 1, Jump - 1, Sneak - 1
Equipment
Long Sword, Long Bow, Quiver of Arrows, Leather Hauberk, Large Shield, Backpack, Provisions (2), Potion of 
STAMINA.
Other
D’Sta sees the world through elvish eyes and has li8le knowledge of how to behave amongst humans and 
dwarves; this can get him and his friends into trouble.


--- PAGE 37 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
36
Step 2. Finishing Off Our Hero
For the purposes of this playthrough we will use the 
elven ranger, D’Sta Leafshadow. Before beginning 
our adventures, we are going to delve into his 
background. Using section 7.4 ‘Hero Backgrounds’ 
(p260) we establish that he was born in the sixth 
month, Warming, and that gives him the bonus of 
‘Courga’s encouragement: You are a positive and 
optimistic person, you have a +2 bonus on tests to 
resist fear or terror.’ His starting wealth is average 
(2d6gp, we roll 4), his childhood life experience is 
‘You were visited by fairies - pick one minor magic 
spell that you can cast 2xday without a casting roll or 
magic points’ for which we choose the spell ‘Hear’, as 
it may be useful for a scout-type hero, his sworn 
enemy are the Dark Elves (perhaps not surprising) 
and his personality quirk is ‘You are embarrassed by 
displays of emotion and like to maintain a calm 
(some say icy) demeanour, particularly around 
strangers’ so we know that he is a fairly reserved elf.
Looking at the rest of that section we decide that 
D’Sta is of average build for an elf, with hazel eyes 
and nut brown hair, fairly young (70 years old, born 
in the year of the bat - +2 bonus to  Animal Lore and 
Animal Handling tests for bats and bat like 
creatures), that he hails from a typical elven 
se8lement - a hidden village - somewhere in Allansia 
and that at this point he has no particular allies or 
enemies to take note of. This can be updated after he 
has done some adventuring.
In terms of religious beliefs, D’Sta is not a paladin or 
priest so we don’t need to provide him with a specific 
god to worship and can say that because he is from a 
typical elven se8lement he reveres the gods of good, 
particularly Galana (known to the elves as Erillia), 
though he is also comfortable with the neutral gods.
Looking at section 7.2 ‘Social Status & Rank’ we 
decide that D’Sta is a member of a military type 
organisation - the elven rangers - and that for the 
moment he has no particular rank, so he starts off 
with a social rank of 3. He already has a weapon and  
armour, so that part does not concern us. Rather than 
being called a soldier, we decide that the starting 
rank for an elf ranger is a ‘scout’ and we will worry 
about other titles if and when he wins promotion.
It is worth pointing out that these background details 
are not required to begin your adventures, but they 
do help you to get an idea of who your hero is and 
what they are doing on Titan.
Step 3. Establish your starting point
We could begin our adventures anywhere - in the 
wilderness, outside the entrance of a dungeon, at a 
se8lement or indeed anywhere else that you can 
think of (on a ship at sea, imprisoned in wizards 
tower and so on) but in the case of D’Sta Leafshadow 
we decide that he is freshly arrived at the city of 
Ludria - this is the city we have used as an example in 
chapter 4. 
If you wish to start in a city of your own creation, this 
is a good point to create your map using the guidance 
given in chapter 4 to divide it into different locations, 
such as ‘temple’ or ‘graveyard’.
D’Sta has entered through the city gate (2) location, 
known simply as ‘the North Gate’ (see section 4.1 to 
see how we built our se8lement and section 4.5 for a 
full listing of the locations within Ludria) and has 
spent last night at the Inn (2) location, ‘The Fair 
Measure’, a decent enough watering hole, run by the 
Bramby family. As he only has 4gp to his name, it’s 
probably a good idea to start his adventuring at once!
Firstly, D’Sta is going to pick up a mission from The 
Adventurer’s Guild - see chapter 11. Rolling on the 
table we discover that the guild agent (in this case a 
wandering bard that is staying at the inn) wants him 
to ‘Clear the Catacombs. All manner of terrible 
creatures have been crawling out of the ground and 
harassing the peasantry! 


--- PAGE 38 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
37
Whilst some losses are acceptable, too many deaths 
could lead to mass panic. Find a catacomb or 
dungeon, enter it and clear it out (investigate at least 
six rooms) then return to the agent.’ D’Sta accepts this 
task - hopefully he can complete it as part of his other 
adventures.
Next we turn to ‘Chapter 10 Missions, Quests & 
Adventures’ to begin (you can also start from 
‘Chapter 9 Villains’ if you prefer to base the mission 
on the villain rather than the other way around) by 
rolling to see what event captures interest. 
With a roll of 4 we discover that ‘A famed 
noblewoman 
has 
disappeared 
in 
mysterious 
circumstances. No one knows what has happened, 
but she was regarded as a skilled peacemaker and 
without her the other nobles are already vying for 
power. Without something being done law and order 
could break down rapidly.’ which is part of the ‘Lust 
for Power’ domain. Using ‘Table 10.2 Combined 
Mission & Villain by Domain’ we find out that our 
first mission will be ‘Run the Gauntlet’ and that our 
first villain will be ‘The House of Swords’.
Of course, none of these things has to be determined 
randomly. You may already have an idea as to what 
your hero should do by planning out adventures of 
your own or you may decide that they will simply 
wander the world. It is entirely up to you. If you take 
the option of following the results of the random 
tables you might want to pause after each adventure 
or mission to see if the events can be formed into one 
larger story that your hero is following.


--- PAGE 39 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
38
Step 4. Begin Your Adventures
We now have a hero, a map, a possible villain and a 
mission - it’s time to begin. Turning to section 10.1 we 
read the details of the mission ‘Run the Gauntlet’, 
which is mission 20 of the example adventures 
provided in section 10.1 and involves protecting an 
informer as they try to reach a safe-house, after which 
they will provide us with information that might lead 
us to the villain who is behind it all. It is best to read 
the entire mission first to ensure we understand what 
is happening (obviously if you are playing with a 
Director and a group of heroes, only the Director 
should read the missions).
Mission Playthrough
To explain how a mission might work the following 
is a detailed walkthrough of mission 20 ‘Run the 
Gauntlet’ from chapter 10. You can adjust any 
elements of the mission to suit your campaign and 
there are various optional rules to consider when 
adventuring in a city as described in section 4.1.
Task 1 is merely to meet with the informer, which we 
decide is going to happen at ‘The Fair Measure’ (IN2) 
as that explains why we are being asked to help, 
though we could have rolled onto our map to find 
another starting point.
Task 2 is to ‘Shake the Tail’ which involves careening 
through Ludria at maximum speed, trying our best to 
either avoid encounters or keep them brief. Stepping 
out of the inn our first roll is a 4, which means moving 
west to the Park location. As we have entered a 
different city location we need to roll an encounter - 
see section 4.1 for the encounter tables divided by 
different locations such as Park, Graveyard, Keep and 
so on. We roll on the daytime encounters list (we 
could do this mission at night if we wanted to, 
though that is generally more dangerous) and find 
that we have encountered a Group of Noblewomen 
(S26) and a ‘map’ encounter, which happens to be a 
Devious Trap! (M16). The details for our encounter 
with the noblewomen are given in section 4.2 
‘Se8lement Social Encounters’. As we are in a hurry 
we can ignore the noblewomen but not the trap, 
possibly placed in our path by those trying to hurt the 
informer. Looking at the encounter (M16 Devious 
Trap is in Section 4.4 ‘Se8lement Map Encounters’) 
and rolling on the Trap Table 4.4.1 we get a 5, which 
is a poisoned dart - we need to take an Awareness 
skill test to avoid it. We roll a 10 on 2d6 which is more 
than D’Sta’s total of 8 Awareness, so he fails to spot 
the trap and is hit for 3 points of STAMINA. We 
would choose to test our LUCK to avoid it, but decide 
that we don’t want to use up that resource at the 
moment - LUCK does not always come back easily.
Now we must also look at the mission details and roll 
to see what is a8acking us (the essence of this 
particular mission is that our hero will be a8acked 
constantly as they move around the city) - a roll of 3 
means a sniper is about to fire. Again we need to test 
Awareness and this time D’Sta succeeds with a roll of 
6 against their skill of 8, so he pulls the informer out 
of danger.
The ‘Run the Gauntlet’ mission requires us to get a 
cumulative total of points which becomes more likely 
as we move through more locations though we 
cannot yet achieve the required total of 25. We get 2d6 
+ 3 for every location we have passed through, so we 
need to survive a minimum of 5 before we check that.
Having cleared the park location we check to see 
which way next and with a roll of 2 its east, so we are 
doubling back. Looking at the map of Ludria (section 
4.1) we could go to several districts east from the park 
and decide to head to MP2, ‘The Fayre’. Moving into 
that location D’Sta (dragging and guarding the 
informer) 
rolls 
for 
an 
encounter 
using 
the 
Marketplace table, ge8ing a 14 - Catacombs Entrance 
(M4) + Roll Again. He makes a note of this as he 
wants to explore a catacomb to fulfil the Adventurers 


--- PAGE 40 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
39
Guild quest but he can’t stop at the moment. The ‘roll 
again’ comes up as a Group of Traders (S5) which he 
chooses not to interact with (one of the options is to 
let them be) but as per the mission we must also roll 
to see who is trying to a8ack our ward. With a roll of 
1, a Goblin Assassin steps from the shadows to a8ack. 
It has SKILL 6 and STAMINA 7 and we must fight it 
immediately. 
Combat proceeds as per the usual rules. D’Sta has 
SKILL 7 and 2 points in Swords special skill (so 9 
Swords skill), the goblin has SKILL of 6. Both roll a 
2d6 and compare totals. In the first round D’Sta rolls 
6 for a combat total of 9+6=15 and the goblin rolls 8 
for a total combat roll of 14. D’Sta wins this round. He 
makes a damage roll ge8ing a 4 which on the long 
sword damage track means he does 3 points of 
damage. The goblin has a leather cuirass but with an 
armour roll of 3 they do not prevent any damage, so 
they reduce their STAMINA from 7 to 4.
It is worth pointing out that D’Sta could have used 
some of the combat options (defensive, all out a8ack 
and so on) or tested his LUCK to increase damage, as 
per the core rulebook.
In the next round, both D’Sta and the goblin get 
combat roll totals of 15, which is a draw so no 
damage is done. In the third round D’Sta rolls an 11 
on his 2d6 for a total of 20 and the goblin gets a total 
of 16 - they could only have beaten D’Sta if they had 
rolled a double six and got a critical, which 
automatically wins the round. In any case D’Sta rolls 
a 6 meaning they do 4 points of STAMINA damage to 
the goblin, who rolls a 5 on their armour roll 
preventing one point of it. They are now down to 1 
point of STAMINA remaining but intend to fight on.
In the fourth round the goblin rolls an 11 for a combat 
total of 17 and D’Sta only manages a total of 16, losing 
the round. As per the mission instructions this means 
the goblin hacks at our informer with their axe 
causing 3 points of damage. Yikes, they are reduced 
from 10 to 7 STAMINA. In the fifth round D’Sta rolls 
a 5 for a total of 14 but the goblin only manages to roll 
a 6 on their 2d6 for a total of 12 - D’Sta finishes it off 
with 3 points of damage from his long sword which 
the goblin fails to stop with their armour. The goblin 
is reduced to zero STAMINA and is defeated.
At this point D’Sta quickly searches this creature for 
valuables - remember that adventurers must earn 
their keep by finding or looting treasure as they go. 
Using the tables provided in Chapter 13 ‘Treasure’ 
we roll on the ‘Humanoid - Poor’ column and get a 
result of ‘B1’ which is the coins table (we decide that 
the goblin, if it has any treasure, was probably 
carrying it). Rolling on column B1 of treasure table B 
we get a result of 6 which is 5sp. Not very much but 
it’s a start. D’Sta also takes the goblins handaxe as it 
is always useful to have a spare weapon and he may 
choose to sell it later.
We have now completed two locations, so as per the 
mission requirements we still have more to do - our 
total is 6+2d6 towards completing the gauntlet and 
with 25 needed to finish the task, we must pass 
through a minimum of 3 more areas.
Going back to the mission instructions we roll to see 
where we go next. This time we get a 4 which means 
move west and from our current location (MP2) we 
could go to TH1 or KE, we decide on going to KE, the 
Keep.
Moving to the Keep we roll for encounters using the 
tables in section 4.1 ge8ing a total of 7 on our 3d6 
which is ‘Map + Squire’. The squire is a social 
encounter (S11) which we can ignore and the map 
encounter is a Weaponsmith (M14), which we make a 
note of but don’t stop to interact with (the mission 
requires that we don’t stop unless we have to, 
otherwise D’Sta could have stopped and maybe sold 
the handaxe he looted from the goblin). It is worth 


--- PAGE 41 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
40
making a note of the map encounters in case your 
hero wants to come back and visit them later.
On the mission table we roll a 3 which means another 
sniper and an Awareness skill test to spot them. D’Sta 
rolls an 11, failing the test so the sniper hits our 
informer with a crossbow bolt for 2 points of damage 
which brings their STAMINA down to 5. With 
nothing further to do we move onto the next location, 
noting that our completion total is now at 9+2d6.
The next roll for direction is a 3, meaning we move 
south to location TE2 ‘The Lord’s Temple’. If we had 
the time we might stop here and visit the temple to 
pray or use one of the services but the ‘Run The 
Gauntlet’ mission requires us to be swift. D’Sta rolls 
3d6 on the temple encounter table ge8ing an 11, 
which is an Acolyte (S19) who we can simply pass by. 
On the mission table we roll a 6 - All Clear! D’Sta 
chooses to use this moment of calm to feed the 
informer one meal, restoring 2 points of STAMINA to 
their ward bringing him up to 7. We have now 
cleared four locations and our completion total for 
this task is 12+2d6.
The next roll for direction is a 1 for north, which 
could be KE, MP2 or JA. For the sake of variety we 
move to JA, the Jail. Going into that location we first 
roll for encounters, ge8ing a 10 which on the location 
encounter table is either a Pie Seller (S23) or a Peasant 
(S18). Rolling another 1d6 we find out it is a peasant, 
who we choose to ignore. On the mission table we 
roll a 2 which is another goblin assassin, bursting 
from the shadows. D’Sta fights it as before but this 
time defeats it without the goblin landing a blow on 
the informer. Checking the body of the goblin we use 
the rules in chapter 13 to determine that this goblin 
had 14sp, which D’Sta takes. He has now cleared 5 
locations and should check to see if the gauntlet is 
complete, as per the mission rules. With a roll of 8 on 
2d6 he has a total of 15+8 = 23 - very close to the 25 
needed but not enough.
Our next roll for direction is a 2, meaning east, so we 
could go to TE3, DD3 or TH2, deciding on DD3 
(Drinking Den 3 ‘The Hole in the Wall’) as our next 
move. On the encounter table for this location our roll 
of 15 is a Runaway Horse (C14) which is a challenge 
encounter that we cannot simply ignore. D’Sta 
decides to try and grab the reins of this errant animal 
and test his Ride skill. With a roll of 7 against his Ride 
skill total of 8 he makes it! D’Sta heroically brings the 
animal to a stop and gains +1 to his next Leadership 
skill roll as a result (we make a note of that 
somewhere). On the mission table we roll 1d6 and 
find that another sniper has taken aim. Testing our 
Awareness skill D’Sta rolls a 4, easily passing, and 
pulls the informer out of the way.
We have now completed 6 locations with our ward so 
roll 2d6 + 18. With a roll of 7 we get what we need - 25 
- which means our informer is happy that we have 
shaken off the chasers and will lead us to the safe 
house (which, as per the rules, is in this location - not 
in the drinking den but in a nearby shack).
Checking the details of the ‘Run the Gauntlet’ 
mission in section 10.1 tells us that having kept our 
informer safe we can now move onto task 3 
‘Interrogating the Informer’. We must pick which 
skills we wish to test. D’Sta has no points in any social 
skills (maybe that is something they can develop later 
with experience) but does have a +1 bonus to a 
Leadership skill test from stopping the Runaway 
Horse, so he decides to roll Leadership first and then 
four a8empts with Etique8e. As with most skills in 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy the fact that D’Sta has no 
points in the special skills does not mean he cannot 
a8empt to use them - he is simply not specialised in 
these areas yet, but can roll against his base SKILL or, 
for 
some 
skills, 
MAGIC. 
The 
use 
of 
base 
characteristics to roll skill tests is described in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy Rulebook and in section 
3.1 Guidance on Common Play Situations. In his case 
D’Sta rolls against SKILL.


--- PAGE 42 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
41
With his 5 rolls he gets 4,4,6, 8 and 9. Three successes 
against his SKILL of 7. As per the mission details 
D’Sta picks 2,4 and 6 as his number and rolls 1d6 
ge8ing a 6, a success! Although he won’t actually 
know until he arrives at the location, the information 
given by the informant is good and when he goes to 
the random location he will be facing his opponent, 
the villanous Count Montagu de Hood.
It is important to note that if he had not succeeded 
with this task then D’Sta would be facing a henchman 
when he arrived at the lair, but the mission would 
still be considered a success as he got all the way 
through to the final confrontation. Missions are only 
considered failures when your hero fails at some 
earlier part and isn’t able to force a confrontation 
with either a henchman or your opponent.
Section 9.1 ‘Example Villains’ tells us that for The 
House of Swords the leader (Count Montagu de 
Hood) will have their lair in a house in a random 
location in the city, so we drop a dice onto our map 
(we could have rolled against the locations using the 
numbering system shown in the se8lement details 
sheet, section 4.5) which lands closest to IN1 ‘The 
Mighty Elk’. Note that the lair is not inside the inn, 
simply in the same part of the city.
To get there we must go from our current location 
(DD3) across the city map to IN1, which means 
moving through a number of other locations. 
The route is up to us to decide and we must also 
decide if we are rolling for encounters in every 
location, using the ‘quiet city’ optional rule described 
in section 4.1 or trying to avoid encounters using 
Sneaking or City Lore skills. In this case D’Sta decides 
to pass through TE3, MP2 and TH1 to get to The 
Mighty Elk location and will a8empt to use his 
Sneaking skill to avoid encounters (he is in a hurry). 
With one point in the Sneaking special skill for a total 
of 8 D’Sta rolls 11 when entering TE3 ‘The Farmers 
Shrines’ so must roll on the encounter table. Ge8ing 
an eight his encounter is ‘Townsfolk + Roll Again’ 
and the second roll is a 9 for ‘Peasant’. We could now 
stop and engage with these people but our mission 
does not include much of a social element so D’Sta 
ignores them and moves on to MP2 (Sneaking roll of 
a 6 so he has no encounters), MP2 (Sneaking roll of a 
5 so he has no encounters) to TH1 ‘The Red House’ 
where he fails his sneaking roll so must check on the 
encounter table for a theatre location. He rolls a 10 
which turns out to be a group of children, which he 
chooses not to interact with, before coming to his 
destination - location IN1, ‘The Mighty Elk’. 
Interacting with social or map encounters is generally 
optional but you should remember that doing so can 
provide you with bonuses or advantages later on.
The lair of our villain is not the inn itself but as per 
the description of our opponent (see section 9.1) is a 
grand house that the count is renting out. At this 
point we should read the description given for the 
leader of the House of Swords as it is unlikely to be a 
simple fight.
Bursting into the house D’Sta finds the Count 
Montagu de Hood ready and waiting to fight him. 
They begin ba8le. The Count is very much a match 
for D’Sta in terms of skill, so our hero may wish to 
consider using combat options or testing their LUCK 
for extra damage when they hit. After several rounds 
of fighting both D’Sta and the Count have taken some 
damage when our elven ranger lands a heavy blow 
reducing de Hood to 6 STAMINA. At this point, as 
per the rules described for the confrontation, the 
nobleman calls for the Watch to aid him, which they 
do 2 rounds later (he has bribed them to be nearby at 
all times). The guardsman grab D’Sta and the count 
escapes!


--- PAGE 43 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
42
As described in the confrontation rules D’Sta can 
now try to convince the Watch of his innocence by 
testing his Law skill (as he has no points in the special 
skill Law, this is a straight roll against his base 
SKILL). With a roll of an 10 D’Sta fails on this 
occasion to convince them and the next time he fights 
this opponent, the Count will still be able to call upon 
the Watch to save him. However, D’Sta has wounded 
the nobleman and in their next combat Montagu de 
Hood will have his SKILL reduced from 9 to 8.
This particular mission is over and although the 
count escaped, it is still a success as D’Sta 
Leafshadow completed all parts of it. Villains are not 
supposed to be easily defeated at the first a8empt!
His first mission (Run the Gauntlet) is fairly hectic so 
D’Sta has only defeated two creatures, two goblins, 
from which he has looted a Handaxe and 19sp. Not a 
huge haul but the whole thing has taken less than a 
day to complete, so not so bad. 
He has plenty of time to gather more treasure, either 
by continuing to explore the city or heading out into 
the wilderness where he might find more monsters or 
perhaps a dungeon to explore.
Step 5. Mission Consequences and Next Steps
Firstly, as the mission was a success (confronting 
your opponent or a henchman is the aim, you are not 
expected to defeat them at the first a8empt) we 
should look at Chapter 12 ‘Adventure Consequences 
& Rewards’ to see what happens to D’Sta. 
Firstly we award some experience; although this 
mission has been brief it was also fairly dangerous 
with a significant chance of failure, so we award him 
10 to 15 experience points to spend as he sees fit 
according to the rules given in the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy rulebook.
Next, D’Sta gets to roll on table 12.2 ‘Consequences of 
Success’. With a roll of 8 we find that he is ‘filled with 
confidence’ and can +1 to one special skill for the next 
week’. We don’t have to decide what that is 
immediately, but should do so once D’Sta begins his 
next adventure.
In terms of treasure D’Sta has only acquired a small 
amount of money and one Handaxe, which he can 
sell using the usual rules (see section 3.1 for guidance 
on using skills such as Bargain) so not enough to 
make a big difference. 
He did also pick up a quest from the Adventurers 
Guild to clear a catacomb and he found an entrance 
to one in the MP2 location ‘The Fayre’, so at this point 
he could go to that location and create a catacomb as 
per the rules described for that map encounter - see 
section 4.4, encounter M4 ‘Catacombs entrance’, and 
this could be a good source of treasure as these small 
dungeons generally contain monsters to defeat and 
pillage.
On the downside, D’Sta will now be the target of 
retaliation from the House of Swords as detailed in 
the villain description - he will have trouble with the 
Watch. This will be an ongoing problem until he 
either defeats the count or moves far enough away to 
no longer be a target of their ire (Director’s discretion 
as to how far that is).
To continue his fight against the ‘House of Swords’ 
we can either pick another suitable mission from 
Chapter 10 or go to the villain description in chapter 
9 and roll on table for this enemy. Rolling a 5 means 
the next mission is in the ‘Winds of Magic’ category, 
so we look at Chapter 10 and table 10.1.1 to find that 
(with a roll of 6) the next challenge is the 
‘Experimental Abberations’ mission. D’Sta can roll to 
see if that is in the city, wilderness or a dungeon or 
we can choose where he will have to go next.


--- PAGE 44 ---

Chapter 3 - General Guidance
43
As an example, we could decide that he will take on 
the ‘Experimental Abberations’ mission in a dungeon 
which, as per the guidance in this book, is 1d6 areas 
away from the city in a random direction. An 
example map of the wilderness around Ludria is 
provided in chapter 6 ‘Wilderness Creation and 
Adventures’ and if we determine that the dungeon is 
4 areas away from the city to the north east we could 
place it in the jungle which is reached by travelling 
across three areas of plains. Once there, we would use 
the rules provided in chapter 5 ‘Dungeon Creation & 
Adventures’ to build our dungeon, section by 
section, until we have completed the mission.
You can, of course, use this initial starting point to 
create your own missions and adventures. In chapter 
10 we provide a number of suggestions as to how you 
might do this. Whatever you choose to do, D’Sta 
Leafshadow has now bloodied his sword and begun 
his adventures on Titan - we wish him the best of 
luck!
3.4 Glossary
Whilst we have tried to avoid jargon and 
abbreviations, inevitably some words and phrases do 
creep in. Many of these will be familiar to those that 
have enjoyed roleplaying games previously but some 
will not, or have enhanced meaning in this book.
RPG - Role Playing Game, sometimes referred to as a 
TTRPG (Tabletop RPG). A broad term covering any 
game in which you create and play a hero or 
character that is under your control but may have 
wildly different skills, abilities and motivations to 
your own.
Hero, Character - the fictional person that you create 
to operate in the world or se8ing you are using.
Director - the person who plans, runs and 
adjudicates the game when playing as a group.
Se=ing, Campaign - the world in which you set your 
adventures. For Fighting Fantasy that world might 
well be Titan but it doesn’t have to be. You can create 
your own or adapt one you are familiar with. 
Alignment - A broad description of the morality of a 
person, group or deity often broken down into 
concepts such as good, neutral and evil.
Mechanic - a set of rules or instructions that allows a 
hero to resolve an uncertain situation by rolling dice 
or consulting a set of outcomes. The use of mechanics 
determines what type of RPG you are playing.
d6 - a six sided dice. 1d6 means roll one six sided dice, 
2d6 means roll two six sided dice and add together 
the totals, 2d6+3 means roll two six sided dice, add 
together the totals and then add three, and so on.
Special Skill - different skills covering different areas 
of aptitude such as climbing, knowledge of the law, 
hunting and so on. Heroes improve these special 
skills by spending experience points.
Skill Test - made by rolling 2d6 and comparing the 
total to the appropriate skill; the most common 
mechanic in Fighting Fantasy.
Characteristic - the basic characteristics of a hero are 
SKILL, STAMINA, LUCK and MAGIC. Usually 
capitalised in the text to distinguish them from 
special skills, the characteristics are the starting point 
for development of your hero.
Test of SKILL, MAGIC or LUCK - most tests are 
made against special skills but some mechanics 
require you to roll 2d6 and compare the total to one 
of your characteristics.
Critical - a result of a 2d6 which is the best possible 
roll - a 2 or 12 depending on whether you are trying 
to roll low or high. Ge8ing a critical can have extra 
positive effects for your hero.


--- PAGE 45 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
44
Fumble - a result of a 2d6 which is the worst possible 
roll - a 12 or 2 depending on whether you are trying 
to roll low or high. Ge8ing a fumble can have extra 
negative effects for your hero.
Experience Point - a reward given to a hero as a 
reward for their adventures, experience points are 
spent in order to increase special skills or 
characteristics.
Damage - anything that happens to a hero that 
reduces their STAMINA. Damage can be from 
physical, magical, poison, disease or other sources.
Monster - not just a slavering beast, but a general 
term used to denote anything that you have to deal 
with through combat so can include humanoids, 
undead, demons etc.
Se=lement - a city, town or village. Any place where 
many people (not just humans but dwarves, elves, 
lizardmen and so on) gather and make shelter.
Location - the places within this se8lement; i.e. the 
inn, temple, keep and so on. This is not just one 
building, but a district within your se8lement which 
has a notable building or function for which it is 
known.
Area - part of the wilderness which has a broadly 
uniform environment occupying a distinct part of 
your map. Maps are often broken into areas of about 
10 miles across.
Dungeon - a series of connected rooms inside a larger 
structure, not always underground. Dungeons can be 
divided into smaller sections. Dungeons often have a 
theme or an overall controller who is in charge of the 
dungeon.
Section - a small part of a dungeon consisting of 
6+1d6 or more rooms. Breaking a dungeon into 
sections makes it more manageable.
Social skills - Usually Etique8e, Con, Leadership, 
Bargain but may include others which involve social 
interaction rather than combat or physical action. If 
you are using the system for Social Rank this will 
apply modifiers to your social skill tests.
Social Rank - a measure of your standing in society 
based on how your hero is regarded by their peers, 
this optional mechanic is described in Chapter 7.
Encounter - a randomly generated encounter, 
usually based on the location, area or dungeon level 
and divided into social, challenge or map encounters 
whilst in a se8lement. Social encounters can usually 
be dealt with peacefully, challenge encounters 
require you to use your skills to avoid harm and map 
encounters add a location to your map.
NPC - a Non Player Character,  refers to a humanoid, 
monster or creature that may think and plan out their 
actions instead of reacting instinctively to the 
situation. Their actions are determined by the 
Director based on factors such as their intelligence, 
type, desires and morality (if any).
Mission - a task or set of tasks that has to be 
completed to either gain a reward or to thwart your 
opponent, also can be referred to as a quest or 
adventure.
Opponent / Villain - the evil mastermind who you 
have decided to pit your skills against to prove your 
worth as a hero. Could also be referred to as your 
adversary, nemesis, sworn enemy and so on.
Henchman - a person who works for your opponent, 
often sent to harass or intimidate you.
Gold / Silver piece - wealth can be transported in 
many ways on Titan, but the most common way is to 
carry small gold or silver coins that are accepted 
almost universally. One gold piece has the same 
value as ten silver pieces.


--- PAGE 46 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
45
In this chapter we show how to create a map of a city, 
town or village to use for a number of purposes - a 
self-directed campaign, adventures generated by dice 
rolling, as support for your own campaign or even as 
a se8ing for a contest between heroes to see who can 
be first to complete a mission or quest! Using these 
rules will allow you to generate a functioning 
se8lement filled with encounters and alive with 
adversaries you must defeat to prove yourself a hero.
It is important to note that however you use the book, 
it's up to you to use your imagination to fill in the 
gaps and make sense of the world. The descriptions 
given for the locations and encounters should be seen 
as guides that allow you to play the role of the hero 
and if you feel that something should be changed to 
be8er fit your campaign, you should change it.
For those using these rules to generate a playable 
campaign, the steps are as follows.
• Decide on a place for your se8lement. Look at 
the map of Titan and pick an area that is currently 
blank on the map. When you think of your city, 
you should consider the terrain - is it high in the 
mountains, with buildings made of stone and 
heaving under the weight of snowfall, or down in 
a pleasant valley surrounded by orchards?
• Use the rules provided to generate a map of your 
se8lement.
• Pick a place for you to start - this could be at the 
city gates if you want to be a stranger, or at a 
tavern if you want your hero to start off as 
someone who has already visited the se8lement.
• Use either the villains (Chapter 9) or missions 
(Chapter 10) to begin your quest.
• Start adventuring!
Some Important definitions
As a reminder, when building our se8lement we will 
be using the following terms:
• Se=lement - the city, town or village you are 
building and using for your adventures.
• Location - the places within this se8lement; ie 
the inn, temple, keep and so on. This is not just one 
building, but a district within your se8lement 
which has an important building or function.
• Social skills - Etique8e, Con, Leadership, 
Bargain, affected by Social Rank.
• Encounter - a randomly generated encounter, 
usually based on the location and divided into 
social, challenge or map encounters. In general 
social encounters can usually be dealt with 
peacefully, challenge encounters require you to 
use your skills to avoid harm and map encounters 
add a location to your map.
4 - Se=lements


--- PAGE 47 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
46
4.1 Se=lement Creation Rules
In this section we focus on how to create and use your 
se8lement map, focusing on building something that 
is quick to make but adds real depth and detail to 
your hero’s adventures.
Se=lement Descriptions
For this book we have divided se8lements into three 
categories; city, town and village. Cities have the 
greatest number of locations and resources, a village 
might be no more than a temple, tavern and a few 
rough streets. It is generally recommended that when 
heroes are carrying out adventures in civilization (as 
opposed to the wilderness or a dungeon) that they do 
so in a city, to provide the full range of environments.
City
You’ve seen the smoke of the cookfires on the horizon 
for some time and now, tired and weary from your 
journey, you approach a city. The rough trail you 
have been following gives way first to a ru8ed farm 
track surrounded by walled fields and then to a wider 
paved road leading up to a great arched gate where 
you can just make out the glint of sunlight on the 
guardsmen's armour. Around you the wilderness is 
now broken up by small farms and homesteads. 
Coming over a small rise in the road you get a be8er 
look at the city. Around its outskirts there are a large 
number of small houses made from a mixture of 
stone and wood, mostly hovels with the occasional 
more impressive house. This slum reaches right up to 
the first of the city walls. A raised bank with a stone 
wall on top of it, some of the slum housing is leaning 
up against it and the few small towers that dot its 
length. You note that whilst it looks solid enough 
there are places where it has been broken down and 
not yet repaired. More impressive is the inner wall. 
Fully 80 feet high in places with a series of round 
towers spaced along it, this fortification has a huge 
sense of strength and stability as it looms over the 
scruffy lean-to’s of the slums. Further back you think 
you can make out the glint of water, so there may be 
a river or lake on one side of the city, it is hard to be 
sure. Now you are closer you can see men-at-arms 
patrolling its ba8lements. 
Although you can’t make out much of the city inside 
the walls you do see many rooftops and what looks to 
be a few large churches and perhaps a keep. The 
smoke of many fires and the dust kicked up by the 
traffic going to and fro creates a haze which makes it 
impossible to pick out too many details. In order to 
find out more, you’ll have to get inside. A steady 
stream of people, horses and carts is moving through 
the main gate and it looks like your only way in…
There are countless cities do8ed across the world. A 
few are famous, but most will be unknown to the 
traveller who must take their chances as they seek the 
safety of the walls. That is not to say that these 
se8lements are new - many are very ancient and may 
have been built and rebuilt upon the same spot 
several times over, but for all that their fame has not 
spread far beyond the sight of their towers. It is in 
these cities that the bravest heroes will find a chance 
at fame and fortune. There is danger and 
skullduggery, thrills and sensations. Opportunities 
can arise at any moment for those willing to take their 
chances, but beware for there are also those who wish 
to waylay or harm the careless traveller.
Town
As the woods give way to fields and fenced off 
orchards, you realise that a small se8lement must lie 
ahead of you. Following a cart track to the crest of a 
hill you can see down the slope the gli8ering ribbon 
of a river upon the banks of which are lined up 
several streets of thatched houses. Resting here for a 
moment you can see a few larger buildings amongst 
the dwellings - a temple certainly and what could be 
an inn or perhaps a manor house. Even from this 


--- PAGE 48 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
47
distance you can see plenty of activity around the 
town, with peasants moving about their tasks often 
accompanied by livestock of one kind or another. A 
pony-cart laden with some kind of root vegetable is 
slowly making its way up the hill toward you, led 
along by a plump woman wearing so many layers of 
clothing she has become almost round.
The centre of the town seems to be a bridge from 
which broader roads lead away on either bank, with 
most of the buildings clustered around this area. 
There is no outer wall but towards the outskirts you 
can see a raised earthwork which, in places, has a dry 
stone wall along it. However, even a quick inspection 
makes you think these are just field boundaries rather 
than a serious a8empt at fortification.
A town is a big enough se8lement that it will have at 
least a small variety of buildings and activities. There 
will be a temple, often built in some prominent place 
near the centre, a marketplace, at least one inn or 
tavern and usually a grand house for whoever is in 
charge. There may not be a lot to excite the 
adventurer here, but it is usually a good spot to 
rest, trade and maybe do a li8le bit of 
socialising.
Village
The track you are following has gone along a 
riverbank for a few miles and you have started 
to notice some smaller tracks joining up. The 
thick vegetation to either side of the path has 
obscured your view until now but as it thins out 
you start to see some buildings up ahead. There 
are not many and none of them are too grand, 
but there looks to be a temple of some kind.  
Surrounding much of this se8lement is a thick, 
thorny hedge, probably grown to provide some 
defence against raiders. This village looks like a 
good place to rest for a while.
All across Titan are do8ed tiny se8lements 
consisting of a mere handful of houses and 
shacks which serve as a meeting place for the 
nearby farmsteads, travellers, hunters and so 
on. Over time they may develop to have some 
extra buildings such as a temple (very common) 
or an inn. Sometimes they grow up around 
nothing more than a hill or a bend in a river. 
There is precious li8le for an adventurer to do 
in such places but they can provide an 
opportunity to rest and purchase fresh supplies 
of food and simple trade goods.


--- PAGE 49 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
48
Mapping Your City, Town or Village
Se=lement Origins
The cities, towns and villages of Titan have been built 
by many types of creatures, but the most usual of 
these are the humans, dwarves and elves. It is worth 
remembering that in general se8lements have a 
mixture of origins and in some places the original 
builders have been replaced wholesale by a different 
group, probably as a result of conflict. Although it 
doesn’t have to, knowing who were the original 
inhabitants of your se8lement might influence how 
you interpret and draw your map.
Choose an origin or make a roll to see what is the 
dominant architecture for your location.
Table 4.1.1 Se=lement Origins
Roll 
Origin
1-3 
Human*: This place was founded by humans and nearly all buildings have been built by human hands, 
 
so the architecture depends on the location. Near woodland, the houses will be mostly wood, up in the   
 
mountains, stone and slate are more common for example. It is up to you to decide based on the  
 
 
surrounding terrain. Human se8lements may be walled or fortified, but they also have a tendency to  
 
 
spread across the surrounding land.
4 
Dwarven: This se8lement grew up around an ancient dwarven minehead, long abandoned and se8led   
 
by the humans of this area. Around the centre, the buildings are made of well cut stone, with thick walls 
and low doorways. Many of the streets and alleys are covered with arched roofs. Any Dwarf character   
 
can add +1 to their City Lore special skill here. Dwarven se8lements often extend below ground and may 
have several ‘levels’ connected by ramps and shafts.
5 
Elven: The heart of this place was once a forest glade or natural wonder, such as a waterfall or gorge, that 
was home to a community of elves. Although it is now largely occupied by humans you still find elegant 
buildings decorated with wooden carvings, sometimes incorporating living trees into their design, and   
 
the streets and alleys are lined with trees or flowers. An Elven character can add +1 to their City Lore  
 
 
special skill here. Elven se8lements tend to expand in harmony with the landscape and any natural  
 
 
features.
6 
Chaos/Evil Wrought: This place was once home to the forces of evil, long since vanquished...you hope.  
Although great efforts have been made to erase all traces of its terrible past, you still find some of the   
buildings are ominous with disturbing carvings and decoration and the streets and alleys are often laid  
out in ways that seem designed to confuse and disorient you. All characters suffer a -1 penalty to their   
City Lore special skill here. These se8lements may have layouts that are confusing or illogical.
*If you are creating se3lements in lands ruled by specific peoples, replace humans with the local dominant race. For example, 
if you are mapping out the swamps ruled by the Lizardmen a result of 1-3 on this table means the se3lement was made by 
the Lizardmen. In this situation, replace the Chaos / Evil Wrought result with humans.


--- PAGE 50 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
49
Reason for Se=lement Placement
People rarely bother creating a city, town or village 
simply on a whim! There is usually a reason for it 
existing where it does, though it may have changed 
or developed dramatically over time. You can invent 
a reason that makes sense for your campaign or 
adventure, or you can roll on the following table to 
provide some inspiration.
Table 4.1.2 Reason for Se=lement Placement
Origin  
d6 
Reason
Human 
1 
Trade - lies on a trade route or is a centre for trade. 
2  
Fortress/Military - primary purpose was original military in nature. 
3  
Natural features - such as a bay, river mouth, desert oasis or mountain pass. 
4  
Order of the Ruler - a powerful person decided to place a se8lement here. 
5  
Natural Resources - such as food, water, ore, wood.  
6  
Reason Forgo8en - the reason is lost to the mists of time!
Dwarven 
1  
Trade - lies on a trade route or is a centre for trade. 
2  
Fortress/Military - primary purpose was originally military in nature. 
3-4  
Natural Resources - ore, gems and stone particularly.  
5  
Order of the Ruler - a powerful person decided to place a se8lement here. 
6 
Reason Forgo8en - the reason is lost to the mists of time!
Elven  
1  
Fortress/Military - primary purpose was military in nature. 
2-4  
Natural Feature - such as a natural bay, desert oasis or mountain pass. 
5  
A place of exceptional magic. 
6  
Order of the Ruler - a powerful person decided to place a se8lement here.
Chaos / Evil 
1-2  
Fortress/Military - primary purpose was military in nature. 
3  
Natural Feature - such as a natural bay, desert oasis or mountain pass 
4-5  
Order of the Ruler - a powerful person decided to place a se8lement here.  
6  
Reason Forgo8en - the reason is lost to the mists of time!
Current Occupation
 It is strongly suggested that you choose the current 
occupation of your starting se8lement, or be 
prepared to come up with an explanation for why 
you are there. Most commonly, your hero should 
start at a city that is home to many types of people - 
mostly humans, but with a fair number of dwarves 
and elves either visiting or living there.
 For other se8lements you encounter, you can either 
choose who lives there based on other factors (if you 
find a village next to a mighty dwarven city, it is 
probably dwarves or humans that live there and not 
orcs) or roll to see.


--- PAGE 51 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
50
Table 4.1.3 Current Occupation
Origin  
2d6 
Current Population
Human* 
1-8  
Human 
9-10  
Mixed city of Humans, Dwarves, Elves 
11  
Dwarves
12  
‘Evil’ humanoids.
Dwarven 
1-9  
Dwarves  
10-11  Mixed city of Humans, Dwarves, Elves 
12  
‘Evil’ humanoids.
Elven  
1-10 
Elves
11  
Mixed city of Humans, Dwarves, Elves
12  
‘Evil’ humanoids
Chaos / Evil  1-8  
‘Evil’ Humanoids, 9-12: Mixed city of Humans, Dwarves, Elves
*If you are creating se3lements in lands ruled by specific peoples, replace humans with the local dominant race. For example, 
if you are mapping out the swamps ruled by the Lizardmen, replace ‘human’ in this table with ‘Lizardman’. A Mixed City 
will be a mostly human city with other races instead.
Generating a map
There are a large number of ways you can go about 
creating a se8lement, the rules we are providing are 
one example that should create an interesting, 
playable place for you to set your adventures in. If 
you already have a preferred method in mind, or a 
map you have prepared yourself, use that instead but 
remember - the encounters and missions might 
require specific locations, so you may have to adapt 
to that as you play. Methods of creating a map 
include:
Create a map: Either on paper or a computer, this 
simple and popular method requires only your time 
and imagination. You can make up the size and 
features as you go along. For the purposes of this 
book cities are divided into locations which cover a 
number of streets, so you may wish to mark 
important sites (temples, keeps etc) as you go.
Borrow a map: With the popularity of role playing 
games on the rise there are a huge number of maps 
available online, many for free. Choose one that you 
like and download or print it off - you can mark in the 
important locations as you go.
Use the ‘Dice Drop’ method: Described in the core 
AFF rulebook or Blacksand as a means of creating a 
dungeon, the dice drop method creates a random 
pa8ern of locations which you then fill in using your 
imagination. A piece of paper, pencil and some dice 
are all that is required. Very useful when you are 
struggling for inspiration!


--- PAGE 52 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
51
Table 4.1.4 Map Creation Summary using the ‘dice drop’ method
Step 
Action
1 
Decide what sort of se8lement you want to create - city, town or village and read the pages of this  
book describing them and giving clues as to the origin and reason for the se8lement.
2 
Get a piece of paper, some dice and a pen or pencil; the paper should be of decent size - A4 or larger -  
 
unless your handwriting is very tiny.
3 
Roll or drop a die onto the paper, and mark its location. As you do so, write in or mark locations from 
the list of required locations for each selement; this ensures you have at least one of each important 
type. A list of locations is given in Table 4.1.5 List of Selement Locations.’ to ‘Roll or drop a die onto the 
paper, and mark its place. As you do so, write in or mark locations using table 4.1.5 ‘List of Se8lement 
Locations’ making sure that you have at least one of each type of location needed for your se8lement - 
table 4.1.5 shows the recommended number for different locations in cities, towns or villages.
4 
Keep rolling dice and adding more locations until your se8lement reaches the size you want it to -  
 
guidelines are provided for each type. So a city may end up with several temples, but a village will not. 
 
Villages and towns have a maximum number of locations, but a city can be as large as you would like it 
 
to be. The bigger the be8er!
5 
At an appropriate place, mark a spot for the docks or custom house. Clearly it depends on whether or not 
you want your se8lement to contain a body of water (river, lake, seafront). If it does you should put  
 
down a docks, if not place a custom’s house at some point near the edge of your se8lement.
6 
Using your imagination draw a se8lement boundary such as a wall or hedge (including  gates if this is 
a city) and a river or other body of water if it is appropriate for the terrain. You may also  want to leave 
some parts of your map as blank (unexplored) so that you can add more locations later.
7 
Go around each location (temple, inn, theatre etc) and mark its boundaries; it’s best to do this lightly at  
 
first in case of mistakes - your se8lement should end up looking like tiling; the size of each location  
 
should roughly align with its type - a park should fill up more space than an inn. These ‘tiles’ will allow 
you to move around the se8lement, so take care with this step. There should be no gaps left between tiles, 
unless your se8lement contains a feature such as a river or pit.
8 
Give your se8lement a 
name! Once that is done, 
you can start to use the 
se8lement conditions and 
rumours section to see 
what is happening here.


--- PAGE 53 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
52
Types of Location in a Se=lement
Within your se8lement, there are a number of 
locations which can be found. These are not meant to 
be a comprehensive list of all the buildings that exist 
here, just some of the important landmarks that you 
might interact with as an adventurer. So, for example, 
the ‘Temple’ location will include not just a large and 
notable temple, but also houses, accommodation for 
travelling pilgrims, places for them to eat, maybe a 
small graveyard and so on. 
The temple is simply the most important and busy 
building in this part of the se8lement. Not every 
se8lement has all the types of location - you will not 
usually find a College in a town or village (unless you 
particularly want one). The table below gives you a 
guide as to the number and type of location you can 
find in each se8lement. For towns and villages some 
locations are given as chance on a roll. You may find 
a College in a town (on a roll of a 1 on a 1d6) but it is 
unlikely.
Table 4.1.5 List of Se=lement Locations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommended Minimum number per se3lement
D6, d6  
Location 
 
 
 
City 
 
Town (roll 1d6   
Village
for some locations)
1-2 
1 
Inn (IN) 
 
 
 
2 
 
1-2 on 1d6 
 
1 on 1d6*
1-2 
2 
Tavern (TA) 
 
 
 
2 
 
1 
 
 
1
1-2 
3 
Drinking Den (DD) 
 
 
3 
 
1 
 
 
1
1-2 
4 
Marketplace (MP) 
 
 
2 
 
1 
 
 
1-2 on 1d6
1-2 
5 
Wealthy Streets (WS)  
 
2 
 
1 on 1d6 
 
zero
1-2 
6 
Streets (ST) 
 
 
 
2 
 
1 
 
 
1
2-3 
1 
Slum Alleys (SA) 
 
 
3 
 
1 
 
 
1
2-3 
2 
Graveyard (GY) 
 
 
2 
 
1 
 
 
1
2-3 
3 
Docks (or customs house) (DO) 
1 
 
1 on 1d6* 
 
zero
2-3 
4 
Temple (TE) 
 
 
 
3 
 
1 
 
 
1
2-3 
5 
College (CO)  
 
 
1 
 
1 on 1d6* 
 
zero
2.3 
6 
Garbage Heap (GH)  
 
1 
 
1 
 
 
zero
4-5 
1 
Keep (KE) 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 on 1d6 
 
zero
4-5 
2 
Hospital (HO)  
 
 
1 
 
1 on 1d6* 
 
zero
4-5 
3 
Jail (JA) 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 on 1d6* 
 
zero
4-5 
4 
City Gate (Wall) (CG)  
 
2 
 
1-2 on 1d6 
 
zero
4-5 
5 
Park (PA) 
 
 
 
1 
 
zero 
 
 
zero
4-5 
6 
Theatre (TH)  
 
 
1 
 
1 on 1d6* 
 
zero
N/A 
 
Catacombs entrance  
 
                     See Description 
Minimum locations total 
 
31 
 
11 
 
 
6
*For a town or village, if these locations are available, they should be more specific than in a city. A College in a city will 
teach many disciplines. A College in a town will be smaller and focused on one thing - maybe Plant Lore for a town 
surrounded by fields, or Sea Lore for a town near the ocean. A jail in a Town will be there for a specific purpose - maybe they 
have a problem with bandits that need to be held before transporting, or the town is used as a holding place for convicted 
felons on their way to hard labour in the mines.


--- PAGE 54 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
53
As an example to show what you can quickly create 
we have included here a map of the port city of 
Ludria, generated using this method. You can see that 
the map is not particularly detailed at this point - it’s 
important to understand that you can start your 
adventures using a fairly simple map and add more 
detail later as you see fit. Your initial map doesn’t 
need to include specific streets and buildings. On the 
map we haven’t put in streets or place names to start 
with just simple shapes to show where districts start 
and end. These are marked up with the abbreviations 
shown in the Table 4.1.5 List of Se8lement Locations, 
so ‘CG2’ is City Gate 2 and ‘MP1’ is market place 1.
Ludria is not intended to be part of any specific place 
within Titan, it is a generic fantasy city which shows 
you how these rules can be applied. You can of course 
use it in your campaigns should you wish to.
For Ludria we have used the map encounters to 
discover some features of each location and given an 
example of how you may want to record these details 
- see ‘Section 4.5 Se8lement Details Sheet’. Exactly 
how much you want to write down is up to you, it 
will probably depend on how often you want to 
return to a particular se8lement.


--- PAGE 55 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
54
Finishing Off
When you have created your map, you should feel 
free to customise it as you see fit. If, for example, you 
have ended up with the garbage heap next to some 
wealthy streets, you could swap some locations 
around until you have a map that you are happy with 
or add additional locations. If you want your city to 
be a renowned home for scholars, you could use the 
dice drop method to add another college or two. If 
you want it to be a highly religious city, add more 
temples. You should keep tinkering with the map 
until you have a se8lement that you feel happy with 
and remember to feel free to leave some parts of the 
map blank in case you wish to add more locations at 
a later date.
What about individual Streets?
In this book we have taken the approach of dividing 
se8lements into locations, which are essentially the 
important buildings, districts or landmarks of that 
city, town or village. This creates a workable map 
with a variety of se8ings for your adventures - each 
location has its own character. We have not provided 
details of individual street layouts. Even a small city 
could have several hundred streets and this level of 
detail is not required to run or play games. For most 
interactions, the exact shape of the street is not 
relevant, though of course you may wish to create 
some maps of streets that you use regularly, or to 
have some ba8le maps to hand.
 What does ma8er is what is going on in the streets, 
alleys, avenues and boulevards of your se8lement - 
this is covered by the encounters tables for each 
location and by the guidance on street fighting given 
at the end of this section.
Encounters in a Se=lement
Having created a working map, it is now time to 
venture into the city and start to meet its people. As 
you enter each location you should look it up in the 
‘Locations’ section, to discover what you are going to 
meet there. For each type of location is given a 
description, any special rules and an encounter table 
that provides a broad selection of people and 
incidents that your heroes can interact with. You 
should make a roll on the table when you enter a new 
location or when you spend a long time- several 
hours at least - in one place.
The encounters are described in sections 4.2 
‘Se8lement 
Social 
Encounters’, 
4.3 
‘Se8lement 
Challenge Encounters’ and 4.4 ‘Se8lement Map 
Encounters’. 
These encounters do not represent all the things that 
you see and meet; there will be peasants going about 
their work, small shops and workshops, traders 
moving goods about and the general hustle and 
bustle of a busy se8lement. The encounters are 
simply the most interesting or relevant things you 
come across.
If you are using this book as a resource to help run 
adventures you can of course ignore the encounter 
tables and put in whatever people or places you 
would like to see. As usual, the Director should have 
final say.


--- PAGE 56 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
55
Types of encounter
Encounters are all divided into three broad 
categories: Social, Challenge or Map.
• Social encounters - See section ‘4.2 Se8lement 
Social Encounters’: Although combat may be an 
option, these encounters are primarily based on 
using your social skills (Etique8e, Leadership, 
Bargain, Con) but other rolls may be involved. 
One important aspect of social encounters is that 
the people you meet have a Social Rank which can 
affect the skill rolls you make as part of the 
encounter. In the encounter tables they are marked 
with an ‘S’, so the ‘Soldier’ encounter is S44.
• Challenge encounters - See section ‘4.3 
Se8lement Challenge Encounters’: Often combat 
based but may also involve using some of your 
other special skills in order to survive. You might 
need to leap across a chasm or avoid some other 
type of danger. You do not, generally, make social 
skill tests in these encounters.  In the encounter 
tables they are marked with an ‘C’, so the ‘Ghoul’ 
encounter is C8.
• Map encounters - See section ‘4.4 Se8lement 
Map Encounters’: These encounters add some 
additional detail about your location and allow 
you to build up a complicated city with numerous 
features, adding places you can interact with such 
as a Weaponsmith or Stables. You should make a 
note of these as you find them in case you wish to 
return there later on.  In the encounter tables they 
are marked with an ‘M’, so the ‘Armourer’ 
encounter is M13.
Number of Encounters each day
The number of encounters you have each day is 
difficult to gauge; too many and you can be 
overwhelmed by simply moving around the 
se8lement, too few and it feels empty and boring.
It is suggested that you make a maximum of three 
encounter rolls per day for any single location - one 
for the morning, one for the afternoon and one for the 
night. This will keep your se8lement busy but not be 
overwhelming.
The encounter tables for each location are different 
and are designed to represent the type of people and 
problems you might run into - the area around a 
temple should have a different feel to it than the 
garbage heap. 
Most of the encounters do not have a set duration and 
it will be largely up to you, the hero, to decide how 
long they take and therefore how many encounters 
you can have during a day. Some will be longer than 
others; saving a burning building could take several 
hours, cha8ing to a peasant might only take minutes. 
However, it is worth bearing in mind that the actual 
encounters are merely highlights of your day. You are 
also finding your way around a teeming city, trying 
to investigate strange goings on, stopping to rest and 
eat from time to time and generally having to cope 
with all that life throws at you.
Avoiding Encounters
Sometimes, you might want to avoid encounters, 
either because you are injured or perhaps you just 
want to move quickly about the city. You can do this 
by making a test against either the Sneaking or City 
Lore special skills. If you are Sneaking, you are trying 
to slip past the crowds without a8racting a8ention. If 
you use City Lore, you are trying to remember a 
shortcut or quiet back alley that can take you 
through.


--- PAGE 57 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
56
If you have to stay in a specific location for some time 
(a mission requires you to watch a location for a 
number of hours for example) the skill test should be 
made with a -3 penalty as it is difficult to go 
unnoticed for this long.
If you succeed with your test you can ignore one of 
the encounters you roll for this location. You must 
decide if you are going to do this before you roll on 
the encounter table.
Increasing Encounters
It may be that you want to have additional 
encounters at a specific location, maybe as part of a 
mission or quest. In that case you may make a skill 
test against one of Etique8e (asking around), 
Awareness or City Lore (searching). Looking for 
encounters means spending some time at a location, 
possibly just standing around waiting for something 
to happen. As a rule of thumb you can try this twice 
during the day (once for the morning, once for the 
afternoon) and once at night, when se8lements are 
generally quieter.
Optional Rule: The ‘Quiet City’
The encounter system is designed to give your 
se=lements a lively, bustling feel - places where you 
are having to shoulder your way through the crowd 
just to make headway and you never know what 
may be around the next corner. However, some 
people might prefer to move around more freely, so 
the ‘Quiet City’ option can be used. If your hero is 
simply travelling through a location en route to 
somewhere else, roll encounters but ignore ‘social’ 
and ‘challenge’ encounters. Keep making a note of 
‘map’ encounters as this helps build up your city for 
future use.
Example: Initiate Zadi Kellist is in Ludria and has spent 
the night in ‘The Thresher’ (TA2 on the map) and now 
wants to move over to the ‘Paupers Pit’ as part of her 
current quest. 
Looking at the map of Ludria she decides on a route she will 
take - through WS2 (The Silver Streets) to the docks, DO, 
then take the ferry across to ST3 (The Hill) and then into 
GY2. Zadi is not trying to avoid encounters so we make a 
roll to see what she meets in each location. In WS2 a roll on 
the Wealthy Streets is a 7 so she meets a Toady (S7) and 
discovers a map encounter which turns out to be a 
Bathhouse (M27). She ignores the Toady and carries onto 
the Docks, where (with a roll of 11 on the table) she meets 
a Group of Traders (S5). 
Zadi decides to spend some time talking to them, buying a 
round of drinks and in return ge3ing some useful 
information. She takes the ferry (1gp fee) over to ST3, a 
Streets location but decides to try and avoid an encounter 
by making a test of her City Lore skill. She rolls a 7 which 
would usually be a failure, but the +2 bonus she received 
from talking to the Group of Traders means she succeeds, 
so she slips unnoticed through this location. Arriving at 
the Graveyard she rolls a 15 and meets the Funeral Cortege 
(C4) encounter! This could be a tough fight for our initiate, 
but hopefully she makes it through.
As you can see, this approach to moving around the 
city makes it a lively and occasionally dangerous 
place. If this is too much for you, consider using the 
‘quiet city’ optional rule to speed things up.
Nigh=ime and Resting
As night falls, most people will return to their homes 
and lock up for the night. Torches and candles cost 
money and there is no street lighting on Titan! Once 
you have completed what you feel to be enough 
encounters for one day, you will need to find a place 
to bed down and sleep. You can do this at an inn, 
tavern or drinking den - see the prices listed for those 
locations - or you can sleep rough, by trying to find an 


--- PAGE 58 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
57
abandoned shack or quiet nook to rest in. Clearly, 
sleeping outdoors in a teeming city has its own risks 
that you should be aware of. If you choose to take the 
risk, choose odds or evens then roll a 1d6 - if you 
correctly predict the outcome of the roll, your 
judgement about where to sleep was good and you 
get a full night's rest. If you are wrong, your sleep has 
been disturbed and you must roll for an encounter. If 
this encounter is dangerous, your opponents receive 
+4 to their combat rolls and +2 to their damage rolls 
on the first round as you awake from your slumber.
Table 4.1.6 Rough Sleeping Encounters
2d6 
Encounter
2 
C21 Troglodytes
3-4 
C9 Giant Rat 
5-7 
S35 Night Watchman 
8-9 
C16 Cu8hroats
10-11 C17 Ratman
12 
C20 Giant Spider
What is outside my se=lement?
For a town or village, when you leave the area of your 
map you should use the rules for wilderness travel - 
the area just outside of a se8lement is likely to be 
farmed land, but could be any type of environment 
appropriate to the land you are adventuring in.
For a city, the area immediately outside the city 
should be treated as either Slum Alleys (1-5 on 1d6) 
or Garbage Heap (6 on 1d6) locations. This is because 
many of the poorer people, unable to afford lodgings 
within the city, will build dwellings close to the city 
wall in the hope that they can flee inside when 
troubles come - which they always do. You should 
break this area into a reasonable number of separate 
parts, based on the size of your city (this prevents 
heroes from taking a shortcut outside the city by 
going out of one gate, around and back in another 
gate).  Further beyond this shanty town will be 
farmland or wilderness - use the rules provided in the 
wilderness section.
Finding a random location in your se=lement
Many of the missions require you to pick a location in 
your city at random. There are two methods for doing 
this. The usual method is to drop or roll a dice onto 
your map and see where it ends up - if it goes off the 
map, roll it again. The location you want is the one 
under the dice, if it se8les on a boundary line then use 
your judgement to decide where you are going.
The second method is to use the ‘Random Location’ 
numbers on the locations table - roll a 1d6 twice and 
refer to the numbers in that column - a roll of 3 
followed by a 2 would be the Hospital. A roll of 5 
followed by a 4 would need to be rerolled as there is 
no 5.4 on the list. For locations with more than one 
appearance (inn’s for example) either roll again or 
use your judgement to decide which one is most 
appropriate.
Location Descriptions/Encounter Tables
For each of the different locations within a se8lement, 
a brief description is given including any special rules 
that relate to that type of place and the random 
encounter tables are provided to bring it to life.
Temple
A large heavily decorated building catches your eye. 
Stone steps lead from the street up to a set of wooden 
double doors which are open and there are people 
coming in and out. Looking more closely you see that 
there are religious symbols marked on the walls and 
you guess that it is a temple of some kind. Given the 
number and variety of gods on Titan, it is not clear if 
this temple is dedicated to one particular power, or 
several of them as is often the case. It is not unusual 
to find a temple to Usrel that also has a small chapel 
dedicated to Libra or a garden reserved for followers 
of Glantanka. It looks as if the temple is unguarded 
and welcoming to strangers, If you want to you can 
enter and investigate further. Whilst the temple is the 


--- PAGE 59 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
58
most interesting building in this area, it is also 
surrounded by houses, accommodation for priests 
and novices, and places for pilgrims and visiting 
worshippers to eat and stay.
Chapter 7, ‘Political Systems & Religions’ covers the 
generation of a random morality and religion for each 
se8lement or region. If you have not decided which 
god or gods are worshipped in this se8lement, use 
Table 7.1.2 ‘Religious Inclination of the Se8lement or 
Region’ and Table 7.1.3 ‘List of the Gods’ to 
determine what the religion and gods are, or you can 
simply assign it as a temple of ‘good’, ‘neutral’ or 
‘evil’ as fits your campaign.
If your hero is a priest of the same religion as the 
temple, they should automatically succeed in the 
Religion Lore rolls needed to use the services here, 
though they will be refused aid if they go to a temple 
that is of a different alignment (priests dedicated to 
the gods of good will not be helped at neutral or evil 
temples and so on).
If you have chosen an alignment for your hero - 
Good, Neutral, Evil they should automatically 
succeed in the Religion Lore rolls needed to use the 
services when they visit a temple that has the same 
alignment, but also be refused these services at 
temples of different alignment.
Special: You may ask for healing here, though the 
priests are not always available. Make a 5gp donation 
and make a Religion Lore roll with a +3 bonus. If you 
succeed, a priest heals you for 3 points of STAMINA, 
you may only do this once per day.
Special: If afflicted by disease, you may try and find 
a priest to heal you here. Pay a 10gp donation and 
then make a Religion Lore roll with a +3 bonus. If you 
succeed, a priest takes pity on you and cures your 
disease. If you fail, they accept the donation and 
promise to pray for you.
Special: You may find a place to pray at the Temple. 
Make a Religion Lore roll with a +3 bonus to find a 
suitable spot. If you succeed, you can spend some 
time in worship - roll 1d6. If you roll a 5, restore on 
point of STAMINA, if you roll a 6 the gods smile on 
you and restore one point of LUCK. You may only 
receive this benefit once per week.
Special: If your hero wants to learn the Priestly 
Magic, they can do so at a temple. In addition to 
spending the experience points, the hero will need to 
a8end the temple every day for a week, spending the 
entire day praying (this will effectively stop them 
from carrying out missions at this time) and they will 
need to purchase 5gp worth of incense each day, to 
burn whilst they beseech their god to grant them 
powers. At the end of this period of worship the hero 
can spend their experience points to raise their 
Priestly Magic skill from zero to one.


--- PAGE 60 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
59
Table 4.1.7 Temple (TE) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C30 Tomb Mist 
 
 
 
S46 Dying Man
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C4 Funeral Cortege 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
6 
 
S25 Suffering Penitent + Roll Again  
C17 Ratman
 
7 
 
Map* + S38 Witchsniffer  
 
 
Map* + C8 Ghoul
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C16 Cu8hroats
 
9 
 
S18 Peasant + Roll Again 
 
 
C9 Giant Rat + Roll Again
10 
 
S20 Priest 
 
 
 
 
S41 Beggar
11 
 
S19 Acolyte 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
S41 Beggar 
 
 
 
 
S19 Acolyte
13 
 
Map* + S30 Nobleman 
 
 
C25 Skeleton
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance
15 
 
S37 Friar 
 
 
 
 
Map* + S25 Suffering Penitent
16 
 
S6 Wedding Party 
 
 
 
C27 Swarm of Rats
17 
 
C3 Falling Nightsoil  
 
 
C2 Falling Masonry
18 
 
C8 Ghoul 
 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Temple Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M6 Forgo8en Cellar  
M2 Small Well  
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M27 Bathhouse 
 
M17 Upwelling of Magic 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M8 Shrine 
 
 
M12 General Goods Kiosk 
M11 Cartographer’s Shop


--- PAGE 61 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
60
Garbage Heap
Congratulations, you have found the town dump! In 
truth, your nose had alerted you to its presence some 
time before you saw it, but now here it is in all its rat 
infested glory.  The alley you were passing down has 
become a ru8ed mud track, carved up by the 
numerous small carts of the rag-and-bone men who 
use this trash heap daily. The dump itself is a fenced 
off area that was perhaps at some time a quarry or 
natural sinkhole and is now filled to the brim (and 
then some) with all manner of rubbish.  Fat, vicious 
looking rats scurry to and fro around the pile whilst 
some miserable looking peasants, large baskets 
strapped to their backs, can be seen picking their way 
through the detritus in search of something to sell. 
Off to one side you can see a tumbledown single 
room shack, in front of which sits a crusty old dwarf 
who is, you guess, the owner or guard of the dump. 
He is si8ing in a broken old chair and is fast asleep, 
snoring loudly, with a tankard on the ground next to 
him.
The most notable feature of this area is the large pile 
of rubbish and discarded things but there are also 
some rundown shacks and other decaying buildings 
- this whole part of the se8lement seems to be se8ling 
back into the dirt.
Special: The Watch rarely bothers coming here. If you 
commit an unlawful action, add +3 to your roll on the 
Lawbreaker table.
Table 4.1.8 Garbage Heap (GH) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S46 Dying Man 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C19 Ravenous Slime  
 
 
C26 Orc Raider
 
6 
 
C28 Monstrous Fly + Roll Again 
 
C17 Ratman
 
7 
 
Map* + C27 Swarm of Rats 
 
 
Map* + C19 Ravenous Slime
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C16 Cu8hroats
 
9 
 
S18 Peasant + Roll Again 
 
 
C9 Giant Rat + Roll Again
10 
 
S1 Leper 
 
 
 
 
S41 Beggar
11 
 
S27 Scavenger  
 
 
 
S27 Scavenger
12 
 
S41 Beggar 
 
 
 
 
C23 Slave Takers
13 
 
Map* + C23 Slave Takers 
 
 
S1 Leper
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C27 Rat Swarm 
 
15 
 
S2 Escaped Slave 
 
 
 
Map* + S16 Burnt Out Building
16 
 
S9 Hag  
 
 
 
 
C27 Swarm of Rats
17 
 
C9 Giant Rat  
 
 
 
C20 Giant Spider
18 
 
C8 Ghoul 
 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Garbage Heap Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M3 Collapsing Ground 
M2 Small Well  
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M20 Crumbling Watchtower M7 Abandoned Shack
5-6  
M21 Forgo8en Stash  
M19 Rogues Cubby 
 
M16 Devious Trap


--- PAGE 62 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
61
Slum Alleys
Cobblestones have given way to mud and straw and 
well ordered buildings are replaced by lean-to shacks 
and precariously designed houses where ro8ing 
timbers surround patched and hole ridden boards. 
A miasma of mould and refuse hangs thick in the air 
and the people you see scurry past with hunger worn 
into their pinched faces. A group of soot faced 
children stare at you and as you look back, you can 
see they are playing a game with what appears to be 
a couple of dead rats. 
You have passed into the slums. There is life and 
opportunity here, but also danger, so beware.
Special: The Watch rarely bothers coming here. If you 
commit an unlawful action, add +3 to your roll on the 
Lawbreaker table.
Table 4.1.9 Slum Alleys (SA) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S46 Dying Man 
 
 
 
C21 Troglodytes
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C11 Burning House 
 
 
 
C26 Orc Raider
 
6 
 
C3 Falling Nightsoil + Roll Again 
 
S16 Burnt Out Building
 
7 
 
Map* + S22 Rowdy Barbarian 
 
Map* + S35 Night Watchman
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S22 Rowdy Barbarian
 
9 
 
S14 Servant + Roll Again 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman + Roll Again
10 
 
S40 Children  
 
 
 
S41 Beggar
11 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S18 Peasant
12 
 
C16 Cu8hroats 
 
 
 
C23 Slave Takers
13 
 
Map* + C12 Mass Brawl 
 
 
S27 Scavenger
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs + C10 Goblin Infiltrator
15 
 
S4 Dwarf Pedlar 
 
 
 
Map* + S9 Hag 
16 
 
S9 Hag  
 
 
 
 
S17 Drunken Dwarf
17 
 
S17 Drunken Dwarf  
 
 
C20 Giant Spider
18 
 
S2 Escaped Slave 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Slum Alleys Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M3 Collapsing Ground 
M1 Quiet Crossroads  
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M18 Magic Door 
 
M7 Abandoned Shack
5-6  
M30 Shady Dealer 
 
M19 Rogues Cubby 
 
M16 Devious Trap


--- PAGE 63 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
62
Wealthy Streets
The houses here are large and well maintained; many 
of them have walled gardens from which trees and 
vines poke out or shady courtyards to sit and take 
refreshment. The street is similarly ordered and the 
cobblestones have been recently swept. There is even 
a raised pavement on one side and some sort of 
gu8ering to carry away the inevitable waste left by 
people and horses. You can hear the sounds of life 
from inside the houses but there are few people out 
on the street itself and most of them seem to be 
servants of one sort or another, hurrying to complete 
their chores. Occasionally a noble rides past, but they 
pay no a8ention to some scruffy looking mercenary 
such as you.
In addition to fine houses there are a number of well 
maintained buildings and spaces in this location, 
such as restaurants and clubs - the sort that don’t 
want any scruffy heroes leaving mud on the 
upholstery.
Special: The Watch is encouraged to patrol here 
frequently. If you commit an unlawful action, you 
have a penalty of -2 to your roll on the Lawbreaker 
table.
Table 4.1.10 Wealthy Streets (WS) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S12 Desperate Chef 
 
 
 
C2 Falling Masonry
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S34 Knight-Errant 
 
 
 
C1 Cutpurse
 
6 
 
S26 Group of Noblewomen + Roll Again 
S39 Messenger
 
7 
 
Map* + S7 Toady 
 
 
 
Map* + S18 Peasant
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S30 Nobleman  
 
9 
 
S20 Priest + Roll Again 
 
 
S11 Squire + Roll Again
10 
 
S30 Nobleman  
 
 
 
C1 Cutpurse
11 
 
S14 Servant 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
S15 Young Noble 
 
 
 
S14 Servant
13 
 
Map* + S11 Squire 
 
 
 
S15 Brash Young Noble
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs + C3 Falling Nightsoil
15 
 
S21 Surly Watchmen  
 
 
Map* + C8 Ghoul
16 
 
S45 Con Artist  
 
 
 
C13 Hobgoblin Spy
17 
 
S39 Messenger 
 
 
 
C22 Leaf Beast
18 
 
C22 Leaf Beast 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Wealthy Streets Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M22 Sorcerers Wyrd  
M20 Crumbling Watchtower M1 Quiet Crossroads
3-4  
M15 Magical Curio Shop 
M8 Shrine 
 
 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M18 Magic Door 
 
M19 Rogues Cubby 
 
M27 Bathhouse


--- PAGE 64 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
63
Streets
A row of houses either side of a paved way presents 
itself to you. Looking along you can see a variety of 
dwellings; Mostly timber frame houses with second 
stories that hang out over the street and threaten to 
crash into each other - in places you could pass 
something from hand to hand through the upper 
windows. There are some stone buildings too and 
occasionally a small herb garden or pigsty breaks up 
the line and you can see that at the back of the row 
there are narrow alleyways weaving between 
gardens, outhouses and other smaller constructions.
The streets consist of a partially cobbled track with 
mud and plank walkways either side of it. People, 
riders and carts jostle to make their way along it, 
whilst avoiding the worst of the muck and nightsoil 
that inevitably builds up at the edges. The smells of 
fires and cooking come from a variety of sources and 
the sounds of busy everyday life are all around you. 
The Streets are not just the place to find the houses of 
the common people - here you will find workshops, 
small warehouses and other buildings needed for 
everyday life.
Table 4.1.11 Streets (ST) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S36 Tithe Collector 
 
 
 
C18 Fire Sprite Arsonist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S33 Artisan 
 
 
 
 
C15 Wrestling Contest
 
6 
 
S32 Fur Trader + Roll Again  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3: S9 Hag, 4-6: S44 Soldier
 
7 
 
Map* + S5 Group of Traders  
 
Map* + C16 Cu8hroats 
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator
 
9 
 
S24 Farmer + Roll Again 
 
 
C1 Cutpurse + Roll Again
10 
 
S14 Servant 
 
 
 
 
S18 Peasant
11 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
1d6: 1-3: S23 Pie Seller, 4-6: S3 Town Crier 
S27 Scavenger
13 
 
Map* + S39 Messenger 
 
 
S15 Young Noble
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs + C28 Monstrous Fly
15 
 
C14 Runaway Horse  
 
 
Map* + C3 Falling Nightsoil
16 
 
S19 Acolyte 
 
 
 
 
S17 Drunken Dwarf
17 
 
C7 Una8ended Stall  
 
 
C27 Swarm of Rats
18 
 
S30 Nobleman  
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Streets Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M10 Smithy 
 
 
M6 Forgo8en Cellar  
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M12 General Goods Kiosk 
M17 Upwelling of Magic 
M29 Auction House
5-6  
M1 Quiet Crossroads  
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M14 Weaponsmith


--- PAGE 65 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
64
Jail
A sullen and dismal air pervades this neighbourhood 
at the centre of which squats a large stone building, 
surrounded by high stone walls - the jail. Even the 
sunlight seems to dim as you approach it, your 
wanderings disturbing a crow in its feasting on a 
dead rat, making it flap up past your face caw-cawing 
angrily. The few people that you see are downcast 
and move quickly past, avoiding conversation. Of the 
building itself you can see mostly the walls and the 
imposing gatehouse which has two sombre guards 
on duty. They eye you suspiciously, it is clear that 
you should only approach if you have official 
business. The other buildings and houses in this 
vicinity have all left a gap between themselves and 
the jail wall, probably to stop prisoners from 
a8empting an escape, but it gives the impression that 
even the stones and timbers are afraid of what lies 
amidst them. As you consider your next move you 
fancy that you can hear wailing and the ra8ling of 
chains coming from inside.
Whilst the Jail is the most important building 
hereabouts, there are also houses, a watchhouse and 
some rather depressing drinking dens and taverns.
Special: The Watch are constantly bringing poor 
unfortunates to and from the jail, so if you commit an 
Unlawful Action here your roll on the Lawbreaker 
table has a -2 penalty.
Table 4.1.12 Jail (JA) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S46 Dying Man 
 
 
 
C19 Ravenous Slime
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S36 Tithe Collector 
 
 
 
S2 Escaped Slave
 
6 
 
S8 Trumpeter + Roll Again 
 
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator
 
7 
 
Map* + S45 Con Artist 
 
 
Map* + S1 Leper
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C9 Giant Rat
 
9 
 
S44 Soldier + Roll Again 
 
 
S25 Suffering Penitent + Roll Again
10 
 
1d6: 1-3: S23 Pie Seller, 4-6: S18 Peasant 
1d6: 1-3: S31 Mummers, 4-6: S27 Scavenger
11 
 
S21 Surly Watchmen  
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
S41 Beggar 
 
 
 
 
S9 Hag
13 
 
Map* + S4 Dwarf Pedlar 
 
 
1d6: 1-3: C1 Cutpurse, 4-6: C16 Cu8hroats
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C24 Grannits
15 
 
S3 Town Crier  
 
 
 
Map* + S22 Rowdy Barbarian
16 
 
S38 Witchsniffer 
 
 
 
C7 Una8ended Stall
17 
 
S20 Priest 
 
 
 
 
C28 Monstrous Fly
18 
 
C8 Ghoul 
 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Jail Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M24 Place of Execution 
M24 Place of Execution 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M19 Rogues Cubby 
 
M14 Weaponsmith 
 
M8 Shrine
5-6  
M13 Armourer 
 
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M16 Devious Trap


--- PAGE 66 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
65
Inn
A large well maintained building stands before you. 
It has a stone ground floor with a timber frame 
second storey, atop which a thatched roof reaches 
down to half-cover the upper, currently shu8ered, 
windows. There is a large wooden door which stands 
open and welcoming, next to which you can see the 
trapdoor entrance for what must be a cellar. To the 
side of the building there is an arched wooden 
entrance to a cobbled stableyard, where you can see a 
horse being brushed down and fed. Above the door 
hangs a sign; the emblem of a black eagle on a white 
background. As you stand for a moment and consider 
your options you can hear the sound of cha8er and 
the clink of cutlery on plates; a wonderful smell of 
beer and fresh cooked food wafts across the road 
towards you.
The Inn is not the only building in this area; there are 
other places to eat and drink, houses and small shops 
and workshops here, but this large and well 
appointed Inn is the most important and notable 
establishment.
Special: You can stop and rest at an Inn, single rooms 
are 4gp a night, a meal is 3gp and stabling is 3gp a 
night.
Table 4.1.13 Inn (IN) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C19 Ravenous Slime  
 
 
S46 Dying Man
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S12 Desperate Chef 
 
 
 
S12 Desperate Chef
 
6 
 
S34 Knight-Errant + Roll Again 
 
C1 Cutpurse
 
7 
 
Map* + S26 Group of Noblewomen  
Map* + C28 Monstrous Fly
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S41 Beggar
 
9 
 
S33 Artisan + Roll Again 
 
 
S15 Young Noble + Roll Again
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S5 Group of Traders
11 
 
S5 Group of Traders  
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
1d6: 1-3: S31 Mummers, 4-6: S7 Toady 
1d6: 1-3: S31 Mummers, 4-6: S39 Messenger
13 
 
Map* + S15 Young Noble 
 
 
S13 Glu8onous Merchant
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C17 Ratman
15 
 
S13 Glu8onous Merchant 
 
 
Map* + C12 Mass Brawl
16 
 
1d6: 1-3: S45 Con Artist, 4-6: S39 Messenger S45 Con Artist
17 
 
1d6: 1-3: S37 Friar, 4-6 S17 Drunken Dwarf C3 Falling Nightsoil
18 
 
S6 Wedding Party 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Inn Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M2 Small Well  
 
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M20 Crumbling Watchtower M5 Quiet Fishing Spot 
M10 Smithy
5-6  
M6 Forgo8en Cellar  
M18 Magic Door 
 
M27 Bathhouse


--- PAGE 67 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
66
Tavern
Occupying a large corner house at the intersection of 
two streets, you see a tavern. A sign painted on a 
wooden board proclaims it to be the ‘Rose & Crown’ 
and someone has indeed a8empted to paint both 
those objects in gaudy colours below the name. There 
are two doorways, both open, and outside on the 
street a couple of benches are pushed up against the 
wall. Both are occupied by labourers of some kind 
who are supping their ales and generally enjoying a 
moment's rest from their work. The tavern has two 
storeys and as you get closer you can see that the 
bo8om level is taken up by two bar rooms, each with 
its own fireplace, whilst the top level (from what you 
can see through the windows) seems to be a sleeping 
room divided up with cloth screens. In general this 
seems like a decent place to get some food and rest.
The Tavern is not the only building in this area; it is in 
fact simply the largest building in a row consisting of 
houses, small shops and workshops. However, most 
people know this area by reference to this tavern 
which has become a local landmark.
Special: You can stop and rest at a Tavern, single 
rooms are 3gp a night, a meal is 2gp and stabling is 
2gp a night.
Table 4.1.14 Tavern (TA) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C18 Fire Sprite Arsonist 
 
 
C11 Burning House
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S38 Witchsniffer 
 
 
 
S12 Desperate Chef 
 
6 
 
C15 Wrestling Contest + Roll Again  
C12 Mass Brawl
 
7 
 
Map* + S32 Fur Trader 
 
 
Map* + S19 Acolyte
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S15 Young Noble
 
9 
 
S37 Friar + Roll Again  
 
 
S22 Rowdy Barbarian + Roll Again
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
11 
 
S37 Friar + Roll Again  
 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again
12 
 
S5 Group of Traders  
 
 
S5 Group of Traders
13 
 
Map* + S10 Puppet Show 
 
 
1d6: 1-3: S31 Mummers, 4-6: S45 Con Artist
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C20 Giant Spider
15 
 
S13 Glu8onous Merchant + Roll Again 
Map* + S17 Drunken Dwarf
16 
 
C14 Runaway Horse  
 
 
C16 Cu8hroats
17 
 
C7 Una8ended Stall  
 
 
S27 Scavenger
18 
 
S6 Wedding Party 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Tavern Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M10 Smithy 
 
 
M17 Upwelling of Magic 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M12 General Goods Kiosk 
M1 Quiet Crossroads  
M29 Auction House
5-6  
M6 Forgo8en Cellar  
M13 Armourer 
 
M8 Shrine


--- PAGE 68 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
67
Drinking Den
You are passing a nondescript building when you 
notice the doorway is open. As you come close a 
strong stench of beer, pipe smoke and stale sweat 
assails you and you hear the sound of laughter and 
out of tune singing. Looking more carefully you see 
there is a painted wooden board nailed to the timbers 
above the doorway depicting a severed hand, 
dripping blood onto three barrels. There is no 
writing. Inside, the first floor of this building has been 
turned into a single long room with a fire at one end 
and a bar at the other. Straw and dirt covers the floor, 
cheap looking wooden benches and stools are 
arranged haphazardly about the place and a number 
of labourers are slumped in their chairs slurping 
down their ale. A large bald headed man with 
extraordinarily bushy red sideburns is carrying two 
handfuls of freshly filled tankards over to one group. 
He is singing lustily and in the firelight his face takes 
on a demonic aspect - are you tempted to step inside? 
It looks like a good place for a cheap meal and a 
drink, but you doubt that trouble is hard to come by 
either.  Whilst the Drinking Den is the most 
noticeable part of this area there are also poor houses, 
ramshackle warehouses, bawdy houses etc.
Special: Make sure to pick a suitably horrible name 
for this location when you create it. Something along 
the lines of ‘The Hanged Rat’ or ‘The Bag of Brains’. 
Special: You can stop and rest at a Drinking Den, 
single rooms are 1gp a night, a meal is 1gp and 
stabling is 1gp a night. If you do stay the night roll 
1d6. On a result of 1, you lose a random item from 
your inventory.
Table 4.1.15 Drinking Den (DD) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C19 Ravenous Slime  
 
 
1d6: 1-3: S46 Dying Man 4-6: C8 Ghoul
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S31 Mummers  
 
 
 
1d6: 1-3: C9 Giant Rat 4-6: C20 Giant Spider
 
6 
 
C1 Cutpurse + Roll Again 
 
 
1d6: 1-3: S43 Student 4-6: S19 Acolyte
 
7 
 
Map* + S22 Rowdy Barbarian 
 
Map* + C1 Cutpurse
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C15 Wrestling Contest
 
9 
 
S21 Surly Watchmen + Roll Again 
 
C23 Slave Takers + Roll Again
10 
 
1d6: 1-3: S44 Soldier 4-6: S40 Children 
C16 Cu8hroats
11 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S18 Peasant
12 
 
C12 Mass Brawl + Roll Again  
 
C12 Mass Brawl
13 
 
Map* + S23 Pie Seller  
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C21 Troglodytes
15 
 
C14 Runaway Horse  
 
 
Map* + C3 Falling Nightsoil
16 
 
S17 Drunken Dwarf  
 
 
C7 Una8ended Stall
17 
 
C11 Burning House 
 
 
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator
18 
 
C4 Funeral Cortege 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Drinking Den Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M16 Devious Trap 
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M7 Abandoned Shack 
M25 Ta8oo Parlour 
 
M24 Place of Execution
5-6  
M3 Collapsing Ground 
M30 Shady Dealer 
 
M19 Rogues Cubby


--- PAGE 69 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
68
Graveyard
A chill runs down your spine and the air seems to 
cool as you come to a low stone wall surrounding a 
dreary graveyard. A few stunted trees grow here and 
there and moss and creepers have worked their way 
across each stone marker, which are placed close 
together like ro8en teeth in a giant’s jawbone. A 
solitary crow looks up at you before hopping away to 
resume its search for juicy corpse fed worms. Further 
along the wall there is a covered wooden gateway, 
carved with symbols of death, through which you 
may enter if you dare - the dead do not always sleep 
soundly.
The Graveyard dominates this area, but there are also 
a few houses and other everyday buildings do8ed 
around its edge.
Special: The Watch are as superstitious as anyone 
else. If you have to roll on the Lawbreaker table, add 
+3 to the result in this location as they are unwilling 
to enter.
Table 4.1.16 Graveyard (GY) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S46 Dying Man 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C25 Skeleton  
 
 
 
S1 Leper
 
6 
 
S25 Suffering Penitent + Roll Again  
S25 Suffering Penitent
 
7 
 
Map* + S9 Hag 
 
 
 
Map* + S9 Hag
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S18 Peasant
 
9 
 
S20 Priest + Roll Again 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman + Roll Again
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S27 Scavenger
11 
 
S41 Beggar 
 
 
 
 
C27 Swarm of Rats
12 
 
S19 Acolyte 
 
 
 
 
C28 Monstrous Fly 
13 
 
Map* + C27 Swarm of Rats 
 
 
C8 Ghoul
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C25 Skeleton
15 
 
C4 Funeral Cortege 
 
 
 
Map* + GIant Spider
16 
 
C7 Una8ended Stall  
 
 
S19 Acolyte
17 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3: C8 Ghoul, 4-6: C9 Giant Rat 
C4 Funeral Cortege
18 
 
C30 Tomb Mist 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Graveyard Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M17 Upwelling of Magic 
M16 Devious Trap 
 
M6 Forgo8en Cellar
3-4  
M3 Collapsing Ground 
M23 Alchemist's Laboratory M24 Place of Execution
5-6  
M8 Shrine 
 
 
M7 Abandoned Shack 
M5 Quiet Fishing Spot


--- PAGE 70 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
69
Docks (or Customs House)
A sturdy palisade, interrupted by towers and a gate, 
surrounds this area set aside for the arrival and 
departure of trade goods. The taxes paid on these is 
the reason for the barrier - for the nobility, controlling 
that supply of gold is a major means of income and so 
it is taken very seriously indeed. This is a city within 
the city, with its own Watch and set of laws. Guards 
in uniforms look down on you from the towers and 
although you are allowed to enter, you know you will 
be asked about your purpose. The hassle could be 
worth it though - there is a great buzz and scurry of 
people bartering their wares, negotiating contracts 
and looking for work as porters or security.
Special: Hauling goods is thirsty work. Roll 1d6 and 
place a tavern (1) or drinking den (2-3) next to the 
docks as an additional map location.
Special: If you have decided that your city is near a 
river, lake or sea, this location is the docks and you 
will see from the outside the rows of masts and sail of 
the ships crowding the quays inside. Groups of 
sailors come to and fro and the sound of sea shanties 
can be heard day and night. If your city is not near to 
a large body of water, this is a customs house and 
yard, where the trade caravans come through a 
separate city gate and you will see dust coated wagon 
handlers moving about in great numbers.
Special: The security of trade is taken seriously. If 
you have to roll on the Lawbreaker table here, take a 
-2 penalty.
Special: If this is a Docks, you can hire a ferryman to 
take you to any location in the se8lement that is also 
next to the water. The fee is 1gp.
Table 4.1.17 Docks or Customs House (DO)  Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C6 Black Powder Explosion  
 
S46 Dying Man
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator  
 
 
S41 Beggar
 
6 
 
S4 Dwarf Pedlar + Roll Again  
 
C24 Grannits
 
7 
 
Map* + S28 Apothecary 
 
 
Map* + C16 Cu8hroats 
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C9 Giant Rat
 
9 
 
S33 Artisan + Roll Again 
 
 
C17 Ratman + Roll Again
10 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3: S14 Servant, 4-6: S18 Peasant S35 Night Watchman
11 
 
S5 Group of Traders  
 
 
1d6: 1-3: S39 Messenger, 4-6: S35 Watchman
12 
 
1d6: 1-3: S39 Messenger, 4-6: S23 Pie Seller S5 Group of Traders
13 
 
Map* + C14 Runaway Horse  
 
C13 Hobgoblin Spy
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs + S22 Rowdy Barbarian
15 
 
S36 Tithe Collector + Roll Again 
 
Map* + C12 Mass Brawl 
16 
 
C13 Hobgoblin Spy 
 
 
 
C26 Orc Raider
17 
 
S24 Farmer 
 
 
 
 
S2 Escaped Slave
18 
 
C18 Fire Sprite Arsonist 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Docks (or Custom House) Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M25 Ta8oo Parlour 
 
M14 Weaponsmith 
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M11 Cartographer's Shop 
M13 Armourer 
 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M29 Auction House  
M18 Magic Door 
 
M5 Quiet Fishing Spot


--- PAGE 71 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
70
College
The area you are passing through is quieter and more 
refined than most of the city. There are no stalls and 
the usual throng of townsfolk has diminished 
significantly. The streets here are cobbled with 
gu8ered pavements and the occasional tree has been 
to provide shade. Pausing for a moment you take a 
careful look around and spy a bearded scholar 
making his way followed by several bored looking 
students each carrying books. As they pass, you hear 
the scholar explaining some obscure ma8er of local 
history. From the look on his students' faces, it is clear 
that he finds the subject much more fascinating than 
they do. It seems as if you have wandered into a 
college of some sort. A small precinct, created by the 
priests of Hamaskis, in which the learned men and 
women of this city can impart their precious jewels of 
knowledge to the select few that can afford to spend 
their time learning rather than toiling. It is not a 
natural environment for adventurers but it is a place 
where you might find out information that is useful.
Special: It’s not illegal for you to be here without 
some form of enrollment or academic purpose, but 
you are not entirely welcome either. You have a -1 
penalty to all social skills whilst here, unless you have 
a MAGIC skill of at least 3 (Sorcery, Wizardry or 
Priestly) or at least 3 points in one ‘Lore’ skill.
Special: You may pay to use a library whilst here. For 
5gp you can access a library for a day, gaining +1 to 
an appropriate Lore skill test. For 15gp you can hire a 
researcher for a day and gain a +2 bonus to an 
appropriate Lore skill test.
Table 4.1.18 College (CO) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C18 Fire Sprite Arsonist 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
1d6: 1-3: C1 Cutpurse 4-6: S3 Town Crier 
C6 Black Powder Explosion
 
6 
 
S38 Witchsniffer + Roll Again  
 
C3 Falling Nightsoil
 
7 
 
Map* + S14 Servant 
 
 
 
Map* + C2 Falling Masonry
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C9 Giant Rat
 
9 
 
S28 Apothecary + Roll Again  
 
S39 Messenger + Roll Again 
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
11 
 
S43 Student 
 
 
 
 
S43 Student
12 
 
1d6: 1-3: S20 Priest 4-6: S19 Acolyte  
1d6: 1-3: S35 Watchman 4-6: S14 Servant
13 
 
Map* + C2 Falling Masonry  
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C25 Skeleton
15 
 
S29 Wandering Elf 
 
 
 
Map* + C28 Monstrous Fly
16 
 
S21 Surly Watchmen  
 
 
S9 Hag
17 
 
S26 Group of Noblewomen  
 
C19 Ravenous Slime
18 
 
S30 Nobleman  
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*College Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M23 Alchemist's Laboratory M6 Forgo8en Cellar  
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M11 Cartographer's Shop 
M15 Magical Curiosity Shop M28 Stables
5-6  
M22 Sorcerer's Wyrd  
M18 Magic Door 
 
M17 Upwelling of Magic


--- PAGE 72 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
71
Hospital
The  everyday sounds of normal life are mingled with 
the pitiful moans of the sick and dying as you come 
past this long building, which is set back from the 
path at the other side of a muddy courtyard that is 
itself crowded with small shacks. 
It may once have been impressive but it has not been 
well maintained and you can see it is dirty and worn, 
with vines creeping up the side and broken shu8ers 
across the windows. Above the doorway there is a 
carved relief showing a hooded skeletal figure with a 
scythe in one hand and an hourglass in the other. 
As you watch you see a man pulling a laden handcart 
away from one of the courtyard buildings; the 
contents of the cart are mostly hidden but you can see 
a bare arm and hand flopping lifelessly out the back. 
As the carter passes you, you instinctively pull your 
cloak up over your mouth and nose - the stench of 
decay is unmistakable. 
Moving into the building are two robed acolytes, 
followers of Usrel most likely - they tend to the ill and 
dying as part of their devotions. By now you have 
grasped that this must be an infirmary or hospital. It 
could have been set up as an act of charity from the 
local nobles or from collections in the temples, but 
either way it looks as if its income is meagre now and 
the chance of healing is slim. The Hospital is the most 
important building in this locale, but it is surrounded 
by houses and workshops of many kinds.
Special: Many cities in Titan have a place where the 
sick and dying are sent for care. Calling it a hospital 
is an exaggeration in most cases. Li8le in the way of 
healing is offered and disease is rife. Each time you 
have an encounter at this location you must roll 1d6. 
On a 1 you must test your LUCK or catch a disease - 
roll on table 4.3.2 ‘Diseases’ to see what you have 
contracted!
Special: If you have been unfortunate enough to 
catch a disease, you can try to find healing at the 
hospital. Firstly make an Etique8e or Bargain skill 
roll to see if you can find someone willing to help. If 
successful you can pay 5gp for a ‘cure’ - a vial of foul 
smelling liquid that is brewed up by an apothecary. 
Once you drink it roll a 1d6. On a 2-6 you are cured, 
but on a 1 some mistake has been made in the 
preparation and your disease will now last an 
additional day. No refunds!
Special: You can try to find healing at the hospital. 
Make an Etique8e or Bargain skill roll to see if you 
can find someone willing to help. If successful you 
can pay 5gp for the a8ention of a ‘doctor’ who will 
apply an ointment and bandages. Roll 1d6 - on a 5-6 
the treatment restores 1d3 points of STAMINA, but 
on a 1 you suffer a reaction to the salve and lose one 
point of STAMINA.


--- PAGE 73 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
72
Table 4.1.19 Hospital (HO) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S46 Dying Man 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
1d6: 1-3: S37 Friar 4-6: S24 Farmer 
 
C4 Funeral Cortege
 
6 
 
S33 Artisan + Roll Again 
 
 
C8 Ghoul
 
7 
 
Map* + S40 Children  
 
 
Map* + C27 Swarm of Rats
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S41 Beggar
 
9 
 
S14 Servant + Roll Again 
 
 
S1 Leper + Roll Again
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
C17 Ratman 
11 
 
S19 Acolyte 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
S43 Student 
 
 
 
 
S43 Student
13 
 
Map* + S28 Apothecary 
 
 
S28 Apothecary
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C25 Skeleton
15 
 
S4 Dwarf Pedlar 
 
 
 
Map* + S9 Hag
16 
 
S20 Priest 
 
 
 
 
C18 Fire Sprite Arsonist
17 
 
C14 Runaway Horse  
 
 
C23 Slave Takers
18 
 
C19 Ravenous Slime  
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Hospital Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M23 Alchemist's Laboratory M20 Crumbling Watchtower M26 Workshop
3-4  
M8 Shrine 
 
 
M27 Bathhouse 
 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M22 Sorcerer's Wyrd  
M12 General Goods Kiosk 
M6 Forgo8en Cellar


--- PAGE 74 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
73
Marketplace
Even before you got to the broad yard filled with 
stalls, you had been struggling past the crowds of 
carters, porters and street-hawkers that filled the 
streets. The shouts of trading, smells from the food 
stalls and the goods piled high amounts to a sensory 
overload that leaves you stunned. Gathering yourself 
you press on and look around to see if there is 
anything of interest to you. The market is set up in a 
large area at the confluence of many streets. Around 
it there are houses and shops, and most have some 
form of stall or display at the front. Inside are kiosks, 
stalls, barrows and even carpets with goods laid out 
on them, arranged by the simple rule of seeing how 
much you can squeeze into the space available whilst 
still leaving paths for customers to walk down. 
Traders guard their wares and shout out the prices of 
their stock in well practised calls. Children tug at 
your clothing, asking you to come see what their 
parents have to have for sale as Watchmen move 
through the crowd looking out for pick-pockets. You 
see piles of vegetables on carts, chickens in cages, 
yards of cloth laid out and many other things besides. 
Special: At the Marketplace it is assumed that you are 
able to buy any of the standard goods listed in the 
AFF rulebook and to sell any goods you no longer 
require. Remember to make your Bargain skill tests 
(assume that the traders have Bargain 7). Trading like 
this does not count as an encounter, but should be 
expected to take some time as you haggle over prices.
Special: The marketplace is so crowded that just by 
wandering it, you can overhear a lot. If you wish to, 
spend an hour eavesdropping and you can roll once 
on table 8.7 ‘Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & Events’.
Table 4.1.20 Marketplace (MP) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S36 Tithe Collector 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
1d6: 1-3: C7 Una8ended Stall 4-6: S7 Toady C6 Black Powder Explosion
 
6 
 
C14 Runaway Horse + Roll Again 
 
C28 Monstrous Fly
 
7 
 
Map* + S23 Pie Seller  
 
 
Map* + C27 Swarm of Rats
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C16 Cu8hroats
 
9 
 
S3 Town Crier + Roll Again  
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator + Roll Again
10 
 
1d6: 1-3: S18 Peasant 4-6: S41 Beggar  
S41 Beggar
11 
 
S5 Group of Traders  
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
S14 Servant + Roll Again 
 
 
S27 Scavenger +  Roll Again
13 
 
Map* + S33 Artisan 
 
 
 
C27 Swarm of Rats
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C9 Giant Rat
15 
 
1d6: 1-3: S24 Farmer 4-6: S13 Merchant 
Map* + C13 Hobgoblin Spy
16 
 
1d6: 1-3: C1 Cutpurse 4-6: S30 Nobleman 
S17 Drunken Dwarf
17 
 
S32 Fur Trader 
 
 
 
C12 Mass Brawl
18 
 
C5 Archery Contest 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Marketplace Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M23 Alchemist's Laboratory M9 Latrine 
 
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M14 Weaponsmith 
 
M13 Armourer 
 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M22 Sorcerer's Wyrd  
M15 Magical Curiosity Shop M29 Auction House


--- PAGE 75 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
74
City Gate (Wall)
You’ve seen it looming on the skyline for some time 
now, so it’s no surprise when you turn a corner and 
find yourself staring at the base of the city wall. 
Looking up you can see the edge of the ba8lements 
and can hear the tramping of the guards boots as they 
make their endless circuits. Passing along a small 
alley past some lean-to shacks you find yourself 
approaching a gate house. It is a formidable structure 
- the equal of any castle tower, with an inner and 
outer gate protected by guards that use their halberds 
to poke and prod at the carts rolling by. Occasionally 
they stop someone and pull them over for a closer 
inspection, but they don’t look too interested in the 
job, mostly doing it to keep happy the captain that is 
sat on a chair at the door of the guardhouse, a tankard 
resting on his belly.
Whilst the City Gate dominates this part of the 
se8lement, it is also surrounded by houses, 
workshops and small places to eat and drink.
Special: With so many guards about, if you take an 
Unlawful Action at this location, you must take a 
penalty of -3 for your roll on the Lawbreaker table.
Special: The Gate is shut at night. If you approach 
this location at night, you cannot pass through the 
gate.
Special: A tariff is occasionally charged on gate 
traffic. Roll a 1d6. On a 1, you must pay 2gp to pass 
through the gate. If you don’t have the gold, you are 
turned back.
Table 4.1.21 City Gate (CG)  Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S38 Witchsniffer 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C6 Black Powder Explosion  
 
C11 Burning House
 
6 
 
C14 Runaway Horse + Roll Again 
 
C3 Falling Nightsoil
 
7 
 
Map* + S24 Farmer 
 
 
 
Map* + S41 Beggar
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C13 Hobgoblin Spy
 
9 
 
S8 Trumpeter + Roll Again 
 
 
S39 Messenger + Roll Again
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
11 
 
S21 Surly Watchmen  
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
1d6: 1-3: S44 Soldier 4-6: S21 Watchmen 
S44 Soldier
13 
 
Map* + S39 Messenger 
 
 
C9 Giant Rat
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C20 Giant Spider
15 
 
S23 Pie Seller  
 
 
 
Map* + C3 Falling Nightsoil
16 
 
S37 Friar 
 
 
 
 
C10 Goblin Infiltrator
17 
 
C2 Falling Masonry 
 
 
 
C26 Orc Raider
18 
 
S34 Knight-Errant 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*City Gate Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M10 Smithy 
 
 
M20 Crumbling Watchtower M26 Workshop
3-4  
M7 Abandoned Shack 
M12 General Goods Kiosk 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M19 Rogues Cubby 
 
M18 Magic Door 
 
M30 Shady Dealer


--- PAGE 76 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
75
Park
You have come across a wooded hillside, too steep or 
broken for building houses, that has been walled off 
and left as a semi-wild place within the city. Peering 
in through the gate, you can see a path heading off 
into the trees before spli8ing up into numerous trails. 
As the ground slopes up ahead of you it allows you 
to glimpse some other features. You can see the head 
and shoulders of a statue peeking out in one place 
and there appears to be an open grassy area where 
some sort of vigorous game is being played - from the 
sound of it, a crowd has gathered to watch and cheer 
on the teams. 
As you pause here and decide if you should go in or 
not, you can see a number of people, alone or in small 
groups, are strolling through the park and enjoying 
the scenery though you also note a couple of destitute 
peasants huddled in their rags under the shade of a 
tree, begging for alms from the wanderers. It might 
be a nice place to stop and rest, if you have the time.
Whilst most of the land within the city walls is filled 
with closely packed buildings of one sort or another, 
some land has been set aside as a place to relax and 
take a moment to sit or walk in relative peace. It 
might once have been a nobles garden, made open to 
the public as an act of generosity or perhaps the 
grounds of a temple that have been set aside for 
contemplation. 
This doesn’t mean it is always peaceful - various 
denizens may creep in and make their home here and 
hawkers visit to sell their wares before they get 
moved on. With no businesses to protect, the Watch 
do not often patrol here which can make it less of a 
place of peace and more of a centre for illicit activity, 
especially at night when the gates may be locked but 
the walls are still easy to climb.
Special: The Watch doesn't get paid to patrol here 
often, if you roll on the Lawbreaker table add +2 to 
the result.
Special: If you need to, you can sleep rough here and 
it is a li8le bit safer than doing so on the street. To do 
so you will need to succeed in a Climb skill roll (to 
find a way in after dark). If you fail the roll you 
haven’t found a way in and must sleep somewhere 
else. If you do sleep in the park, roll a 1d6 and choose 
high or low - if you choose high, you only get an 
encounter on a 1 or 2. If you choose low you only get 
an encounter on a 5 or 6. Use the usual sleeping rough 
encounter table if you have chosen a bad spot to rest.


--- PAGE 77 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
76
Table 4.1.22 Park (PA) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C19 Ravenous Slime  
 
 
S46 Dying Man
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
S3 Town Crier  
 
 
 
C24 Grannits
 
6 
 
S8 Trumpeter + Roll Again 
 
 
C12 Mass Brawl
 
7 
 
Map* + C15 Wrestling Contest 
 
Map* + C15 Wrestling Contest
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S2 Escaped Slave
 
9 
 
C5 Archery Contest + Roll Again 
 
S9 Hag + Roll Again
10 
 
S18 Peasant 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
11 
 
S40 Children  
 
 
 
C20 Giant Spider
12 
 
S29 Wandering Elf 
 
 
 
S29 Wandering Elf
13 
 
Map* + S26 Group of Noblewomen  
S41 Beggar 
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C25 Skeleton
15 
 
S10 Puppet Show 
 
 
 
Map* + C22 Leaf Beast
16 
 
S34 Knight-Errant 
 
 
 
C26 Orc Raider
17 
 
1d6: 1-3: S37 Friar 4-6: S6 Wedding Party 
C21 Troglodytes
18 
 
C22 Leaf Beast 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Park Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M5 Quiet Fishing Spot 
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M27 Bathhouse
3-4  
M2 Small Well  
 
M21 Forgo8en Stash  
M12 General Goods Kiosk
5-6  
M22 Sorcerer’s Wyrd  
M18 Magic Door 
 
M16 Devious Trap


--- PAGE 78 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
77
Keep
The narrow streets open up ahead of you into a wide 
courtyard, at the far side of which stands the 
forbidding bulk of the keep. A large building of 
neatly cut grey stone, it has an outer wall with 
crenellated ba8lements, a watchtower at each corner 
and a single main gate large enough to accommodate 
wagons or, more importantly, a squad of soldiers.  
The doors of the gate are currently open and you can 
see past the guardsmen to the inner courtyard and 
the keep itself - a severe looking block of thick stone 
pierced by narrow windows and recessed heavy oak 
doors. Unsurprisingly there is a lot of activity here - 
at the inner courtyard you can see a wagoneer 
unloading barrels with the help of some uniformed 
servants, atop the outer wall there are guards on 
lookout, resting their crossbows against the tops of 
the ba8lements. At the main gate there are more 
guards and a small knot of soldiers and traders 
haggling over something or other whilst a squad of 
recruits practises a combat drill in the outer 
courtyard, watched over by a grey haired instructor. 
The clang of sword on shield is punctuated only by 
his words of advice to the young menof the garrison.
Around the edge of this area, a li8le back from the 
keep, life carries on as normal with peasants and 
servants hurrying about their business and even a 
couple of hawkers trying to interest the soldiers in a 
pie or an ale. Although not as busy as the 
marketplace, this is still a hub of activity.
Special: It is inadvisable to break the law here - if you 
do so, take a -4 penalty to the Lawbreaker roll.
Table 4.1.23 Keep (KE) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
C1 Cutpurse  
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
C6 Black Powder Explosion  
 
C3 Falling Nightsoil
 
6 
 
S38 Witchsniffer + Roll Again  
 
S11 Squire
 
7 
 
Map* + S11 Squire 
 
 
 
Map* + S22 Rowdy Barbarian
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
S41 Beggar
 
9 
 
S18 Peasant + Roll Again 
 
 
C13 Hobgoblin Spy + Roll Again
10 
 
S21 Surly Watchmen  
 
 
S44 Soldier
11 
 
S44 Soldier 
 
 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
12 
 
1d6: 1-3 S39 Messenger 4-6: S3 Town Crier 1d6: 1-3 S39 Messenger 4-6: S8 Trumpeter
13 
 
Map* + S30 Nobleman 
 
 
S9 Hag
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C8 Ghoul
15 
 
C14 Runaway Horse  
 
 
Map* + C27 Swarm of Rats
16 
 
C14 Runaway Horse  
 
 
1d6: 1-3 S27 Scavenger 4-6: C17 Ratman
17 
 
S10 Puppet Show 
 
 
 
C21 Troglodytes
18 
 
S36 Tithe Collector 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Keep Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M24 Place of Execution 
M14 Weaponsmith 
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
M13 Armourer 
 
M19 Rogues Cubby 
 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M10 Smithy 
 
 
M6 Forgo8en Cellar  
M20 Crumbling Watchtower


--- PAGE 79 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
78
Theatre
‘Come Ladies and Gentleman, Gentlemen and 
Ladies, come hither and see the delights - 
acrobat’s that spin and leap, bards with voices 
sweet as nightingales, mummers with stories 
old and new - all this and more await you!’ The 
gleeman, dressed in a patchwerk of coloured 
cloth, jesters boots of green leather ringed with 
tiny brass bells and a tall floppy hat decorated 
with a multitude of feathers and fake 
gemstones, leads you onwards to a large 
brightly painted building. Festooned with 
gaily coloured statues and dyed cloth banners 
that flap in the breeze, signs proclaim (in 
several languages) the opportunity to enjoy 
the delights of the theatre all for the price of a 
few coppers. The Theatre stands several 
storeys high, broad wooden steps lead up to 
several wide doorways which are flanked by 
ticket booths guarded by hulking sour-faced 
bouncers that deter those who try to slip in 
without payment. From each floor light 
streams out of coloured glass in the shape of 
the masks of tragedy, comedy, glory, disaster 
and all the other touchpoints of drama. A 
crowd mills around at the entrance and in the 
street ticket-sellers move amongst them, 
drumming up an audience of the next 
performance.
Around and about the Theatre there are other smaller 
venues and entertainments as this area is rich with 
nightlife, though there are also houses both rich and 
poor. This is one of the most varied locations in the 
se8lement.
Special: You may indeed visit the Theatre, which is 
ready to take your coin both day and night. For 2sp 
you can spend a few hours enjoying a number of acts 
- singers, dancers, acrobats, comedians and so on 
make their way across the stage. Drinks and food can 
be bought here too, Ale (or similar) for 3sp and a hot 
meal for 2gp. For a more refined performance you can 
watch a play (1gp) or even spend a night at the opera 
(5gp and you are expected to be clean and well 
dressed).
Special: If your city is particularly barbaric or cruel, 
you might want to replace the theatre location with 
an arena for gladiatorial combat. If your city is not the 
sort of place that would have a permanent theatre, 
you can leave this location as an open area such as a 
square, plaza or park that could be used as a place to 
hold circuses or events.


--- PAGE 80 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
79
Table 4.1.24 Theatre (TH) Location Encounters. Duplicate encounters should be re-rolled.
  3d6 
 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
 
3 
 
S46 Dying Man 
 
 
 
C30 Tomb Mist
 
4 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again
 
5 
 
1d6: 1-3: S7 Toady 4-6: C1 Cutpurse  
1d6: 1-3: C16 Cu8hroats 4-6: C1 Cutpurse
 
6 
 
S45 Con Artist + Roll Again  
 
C3 Falling Nightsoil
 
7 
 
Map* + S26 Group of Noblewomen  
Map* + S17 Drunken Dwarf
 
8 
 
S42 Townsfolk + Roll Again  
 
C28 Monstrous Fly
 
9 
 
S37 Friar + Roll Again  
 
 
C12 Mass Brawl + Roll Again
10 
 
1d6: 1-3: S18 Peasant 4-6: S40 Children 
S41 Beggar
11 
 
S31 Mummers + Roll Again  
 
S31 Mummers
12 
 
1d6: 1-3: S11 Squire 4-6: S8 Trumpeter 
1d6: 1-3: S43 Student 4-6: S39 Messenger
13 
 
Map* + S15 Young Noble 
 
 
S35 Night Watchman
14 
 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + Roll Again 
M4 Catacombs Entrance + C20 Giant Spider
15 
 
S10 Puppet Show 
 
 
 
Map* + S15 Young Noble
16 
 
S13 Glu8onous Merchant 
 
 
S12 Desperate Chef
17 
 
S34 Knight-Errant 
 
 
 
1d6: 1-3: C23 Slave Takers 4-6: S23 Pie Seller
18 
 
S29 Wandering Elf 
 
 
 
C29 Chaos Horror
*Theatre Map Encounter Table - Roll 1d6 then 1d6
 
 
 
 
 
Second d6
 First d6 
1-2 
 
 
 
3-4 
 
 
 
5-6
1-2  
M21 Forgo8en Stash  
M8 Shrine 
 
 
M26 Workshop
3-4  
S16 Burnt Out Building 
M9 Latrine 
 
 
M28 Stables
5-6  
M7 Abandoned Shack 
M25 Ta8oo Parlour 
 
M30 Shady Dealer


--- PAGE 81 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
80
Catacombs Entrance
Many of the cities of Titan are very old and over the 
span of centuries people have often simply built on 
top of older structures rather than bother clearing 
them away. In addition, there are sewers, dungeons, 
covered over streams, crypts, caves and all manner of 
cellars, tunnels and delvings. Sometimes these 
underground spaces join up to create a hidden city 
under the feet of the unknowing surface dwellers. 
Collectively these places are known as catacombs, 
where all manner of dark and sinister activities take 
place. Most of the time the people block up or seal the 
entrances to these dangerous places, but sometimes a 
natural collapse, or something digging out from 
inside the catacomb, opens them up again. Having 
discovered a way into a catacomb you may now, if 
you wish, venture inside and explore it.
Generating a Catacomb
A catacomb is essentially a mini dungeon and you 
should read ‘Chapter 5. Dungeon Creation & 
Encounters’ to see what options are available to you, 
but the intention of a catacomb is to make a small 
structure containing 3+1d6 rooms - just one dungeon 
section. After clearing all these rooms you can test 
against your Underground Lore skill to discover 
more and if you succeed you find a way to access 
another 1d6 rooms (maybe you find a collapsing wall 
or a concealed tunnel that leads deeper into the caves 
and so on). You can keep trying to discover more 
areas, but each subsequent test of Underground Lore 
has a penalty of -3, then -6 and so on.
If you wish to explore the catacomb, you have two 
choices. You can use the detailed options provided in 
Chapter 5 ‘Dungeon Creation & Encounters’ or, if 
you do not want to create a separate map, you can 
treat it as a series of rooms with ‘abbreviated’ 
dungeon creation rules. Simply assume that each 
room is connected to the next in a fairly obvious 
manner and use the following tables to find out what 
each contains. Roll 1d6 on each table for each room 
and proceed as far as you dare!
Roll once on Table 4.1.25  Catacomb Origin, Table 
4.1.26 Catacomb Condition and Table 4.1.27 Creature 
Condition to find out what sort of environment you 
are entering and what modifiers you need to be 
aware of. As you move to each room, roll on Table 
4.1.28 Catacomb Encounters to see what it contains. 
This is a very shortened version of the more extensive 
rules given in Chapter 5.


--- PAGE 82 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
81
Table 4.1.25  Catacomb Origin. Roll once for the whole catacomb.
1d6 
Origin  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monsters (if encountered, see 
encounters table below)*. 
1 
Cellars - This was once a cellar or basement of a great house that has  
1 - C19 Ravenous Slime,
been long abandoned and fallen into disrepair. The environment was  
2 - C25 Skeleton, 
built for people but it is also li8ered with the rubbish and detritus,  
3-4 - C9 Giant Rat
such as broken bits of furniture, that got shoved down here before  
5-6 - C20 Giant Spider
it was forgo8en.
2 
Cave - You have stumbled into part of a natural cave system, which  
1 - C20 Giant Spider
has been built over as the city grew. The tunnels and rooms are  
 
2 - C25 Skeleton
unworked and there are places where you have to squeeze through  
3-4 - C21 Troglodytes
narrow gaps to move forward. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 - C24 Grannits
6 - C17 Ratman
3 
Lair - this place has been excavated by some creature or group of   
1 - C21 Troglodytes
creatures as its home. Looking at the huge claw marks on the walls,  
2 - C24 Grannits
you can’t help wondering if they are still about... 
 
 
 
3-4 - C9 Giant Rat
5-6 - C20 Giant Spider
4 
Sewer - This was once part of the sewerage system and for all you  
1 - C19 Ravenous Slime
know, it might still be connected in places. A nasty miasma fills the  
2 - C20 Giant Spider
air and the squeaking of rats can be heard in the darkness. The  
 
3-4 - C9 Giant Rat
floor is a mixture of mud and slime - remember to clean your boots later. 5-6 - C17 Ratman
5 
Dungeon - these rooms and corridors were constructed as part of a  
1 - C8 Ghoul
larger building, almost certainly for the purpose of imprisoning people.  2 - C25 Skeleton
The rooms are small and rough with the rusted remains of chains   
3- C9 Giant Rat
decorating the walls.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 - C26 Orc Raider
5-6 - C10 Goblin Infiltrator
6 
Crypt - this was once a religious place used to house the remains of  
1 - C9 Giant Rat
the dead. Tomb raiders have visited and the once carefully organised  
2- C20 Giant Spider
tombs have been broken into and pillaged. As you step forward you  
3-4 - C8 Ghoul
can feel bones crunching underfoot.  
 
 
 
 
5-6 - C25 Skeleton
*For a more extensive variety of monsters, use the encounter tables in the Advanced Fighting Fantasy core rulebook or 
bestiaries such as Out of the Pit or Return to the Pit, or refer to the appropriate dungeon level encounters from Chapter 5 
‘Dungeon Creation & Encounters’.


--- PAGE 83 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
82
Table 4.1.26  Catacomb Condition. 
1d6 
Condition
1 
Crumbling - this place is falling apart! Bits of stone and masonry are peeling off the walls and ceilings   
 
and your stomping around is only making things worse. Every round of combat you must roll a 1d6. On 
a result of one, a piece of the ceiling has dislodged and is falling on you. You must make a test against   
 
SKILL with a +2 bonus or suffer one point of STAMINA damage.
2 
Slimy - Moisture hangs heavy in the air, condensation dripping from the walls and ceiling and leaving   
 
fetid pools filled with foul smelling slime on every floor. Each time you are struck in combat you must   
 
make a SKILL roll with a +2 bonus or slip on the muck and find yourself prone (-4 to combat until you   
 
spend a round ge8ing up).
3 
Unholy - at some point this place was the site of a temple of evil and traces of that time linger on. If you 
 
use magic to heal yourself you will heal one less point of stamina than normal.
4 
Infernal - strange heat courses through the floor and walls in this area and pools of bubbling hot water   
 
have to be stepped around carefully. If you are in combat, roll a 2d6 each round - on a roll of a 2 a blast   
 
of steam has vented from a nearby crack in the masonry and you suffer 2 points of STAMINA damage.   
 
On the good side, once you have dealt with the encounters in this area you can bathe in a warm pool.
5 
Well lit - Most Catacombs are near pitch black dark, but in this case a strange fungus covers the walls   
 
and ceilings, giving off a weird purple glow. You don’t need torches here but Sneak skill has a -1 penalty. 
6 
Consecrated - This area is located at a site that was once a temple of a benevolent god. If you use any   
 
healing magic in here, you gain an additional +1 STAMINA points in recovery.
Table 4.1.27  Creature Conditions. 
1d6 
Creature Modifiers
1 
Well-fed - The creatures of this place have been particularly well supplied with food recently - some  
 
 
unlucky adventurers perhaps - and you must add +1 STAMINA to each creature you encounter
2 
Noisy - Creatures here are particularly noisy and unsubtle - you may add +1 to your Awareness Special 
 
Skill rolls whilst in this dungeon.
3 
Starving - The creatures of this area are running low on supplies and are starving. You may reduce the   
 
STAMINA of every creature by 1 point.
4 
Plagued - a foul stench fills the air down here and you cough and splu8er on bi8er spores that seem to   
 
fill the air. The creatures you encounter are plagued and after any combat you must roll 1d6. On a roll of 
1 you can have been infected - roll on table 4.3.2 ‘Diseases’.
5 
Infested - The sound of scu8ling claws is nearly constant here. Any encounter in this area comes with an 
additional Grannit - which you have to deal with.
6 
Riches - The monsters of this place have had particularly good luck with their raiding and delving. Every 
creature you defeat has an additional 1d6 pieces of gold in its hoard.


--- PAGE 84 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
83
Table 4.1.28 Catacomb Encounters. For more variety, refer to the tables and advice given in Chapter 5.
1d6 
Roll once as you enter each room.
1 
This area is empty - you investigate carefully, but there is neither treasure, trap nor monster to be found. 
The quiet here is unse8ling and you have no desire to stay longer.
2 
Trapped - roll on the Devious Trap (M16)  - to move through this area. There are no monsters here.
3-4 
Monster - roll on the table above to see what is lurking down here in the darkness
5 
Monster + Trap - roll on the table to see what you meet and in addition you must roll on the Devious Trap 
(M16). You must deal with the trap before you proceed to the fight.
6 
Monster and Treasure - in addition to meeting something you need to fight, you have found a hoard of   
treasure - you must defeat the encounter before you get to loot the hoard (see the Forgo8en Stash Map   
 
encounter M21).
Example: Skurl Glintscale has found a catacombs entrance 
in one of the ‘streets’ locations in Ludria. In this case part 
of a house has collapsed, revealing a narrow entrance into 
a chamber that lies below street level. Deciding that we 
don’t want to create a complete dungeon, we use the 
abbreviated rules to make a few rooms to explore.
Firstly we roll to see how big the catacomb is - a roll of 3 
means we have 6 rooms to explore. Next we roll for its 
origin and another 3 tells us that this is a lair - excavated 
by some animal, though they may not live here anymore. 
Next we roll to see what condition our lair is in. A 5 
indicates that it is well lit, with a luminous fungus 
providing sufficient light that a torch is not needed. The 
next step is to check the creature's condition and a roll of 4 
means they are ‘plagued’, which means we will have to 
check for disease after each fight. Yuck. 
With that done we can proceed to explore room by room. 
Each time we roll on the Catacomb Encounters table to see 
what we are faced with - an empty room, a trap, or a 
monster. Skurl can explore the whole catacomb or retreat 
after dealing with a few rooms. If he does clear every room 
he can make a test of his Underground Lore skill to try and 
find a further 1d6 rooms to explore. 
Whatever we decide to do, we should make a note of where 
the entrance is but bear in mind that it will only exist for 
1d6+3 days.
Special: Catacombs do not have a separate encounter 
table. The encounters will be inside, should you 
venture there. In addition, The Watch never enters 
the Catacombs, so no encounters here will require 
you to roll on the Lawbreaker table.
Special: The general citizenry do not like leaving 
open an entrance to a dangerous underground world 
near to their house or business. A Catacombs 
entrance should be marked on your map, but should 
be removed after 1d6+3 days - at some point the locals 
get together and board it up or fill it in with rubble. 
Make this roll when you find the entrance and make 
a note of when to remove it.
Se=lement Specific Rules
There are some things that apply to adventuring 
within a se8lement but not to dungeons or the wilds, 
mostly down to interactions with ‘the Watch’ or 
whatever local law enforcement exists in the city, 
town or village. These rules are intended to cover 
those interactions.
Fighting in the Streets
Some encounters and missions require you to fight in 
the streets (or taverns) of Titan; you might be 
wondering how the ‘street environment’ affects these 
combats. As an optional rule, you can roll on the 
following table to see if there are any other factors to 
consider.


--- PAGE 85 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
84
Table 4.1.29 Street Factors
2d6 
Factor
2 
The Watch appear and they are not happy with this fighting. They swarm you and your opponent,  
 
 
dragging you apart and stopping the fight. Make a test of your Law skill - if you succeed they let you go 
after ten minutes interrogation, if you fail they drag you to the Jail location where you must spend the   
 
night, though you get all your gear back in the morning.
3 
The mob turns on you - other people nearby decide you are a troublemaker and pelt you with   
 
 
improvised weapons. You have to fight with -1 to all skill tests as you dodge the barrage of muck.
4 
Mud & Muck - the street is slippery with mud from a recent storm or ro8ing food and waste (you don’t 
 
have time to check which) - any tests of Acrobatics, Running, Climbing or Jumping have a -2 penalty here 
as you slip and slide.
5 
Small - the street is small and cramped, you cannot use a missile weapon here and Sneaking is at -3.
6 
As combat begins, someone throws a bucket of nightsoil from a window above you; test your Dodge skill 
or get hit. If you do get covered with indescribable muck you have -3 to your combat rolls for the first   
 
two rounds as you cough and splu8er. Later on, you may want to take a bath.
7 
The streets are quiet..the fight proceeds as normal and without interruption.
8 
A group of drinkers stumble out of a nearby establishment and watch with interest. If you make a test of 
your Leadership skill some will come and help you, giving you +1 to your Combat skill rolls.
9 
Unusual Layout - this street has an odd shape, 
you can use it to your advantage ge8ing +3 
once to one skill roll from Sneaking, 
Awareness or combat. If you use a ranged 
weapon you can shoot twice before your foe 
reaches you.
10 
The crowd goes wild! Other people on the 
streets see you are in trouble and decide to 
help, pelting your opponent with items such 
as cabbages, bricks etc. Each round they dish 
out one point of damage to your foe.
11 
You spot some rickety crates in a perfect 
location; you can hide behind them (+3 
Sneaking) or you can climb on them to gain +2 
to your combat roll by having the higher 
ground, but if you fumble an a8ack  the 
crates break and you fall to the floor, leaving 
you prone for one round.
12 
A passing adventurer pitches in to help you.
 She has SKILL 8 STAMINA 12 Weapon: Mace 
Armour: Shield and Chain Hauberk - she 
fights alongside you until this combat is over, 
then hurries off to pursue her own quests.


--- PAGE 86 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
85
Unlawful Actions
Although most heroes try to behave decently, it is 
possible to play as a brute that achieves their aims 
whilst also terrorising the locals. To that end, nearly 
all NPC’s have their characteristics listed, meaning 
you can a8ack them if you wish to. It’s important to 
note three things:
• If you are going to a8ack them, you must decide 
this at the start of the encounter. You cannot use 
their dialogue options if you decide to fight them.
• Once the combat has been resolved, you must 
check to see if a8acking them was an unlawful 
action 
(it 
will 
be 
stated 
alongside 
their 
characteristics). If it was, you now need to roll on 
the Lawbreaker table to see what happens to you.
• If you are playing a mission or campaign, you 
can still obtain information from them, it is 
assumed you are intimidating them into speaking.
• Most civilians (unless stated otherwise in their 
description) will a8empt to flee after the first 
round of combat. If they get away, you still get to 
roll for their treasure (if any) and still have to roll 
on the Lawbreaker table.
On a world like Titan there isn’t a formalised police 
system but instead every place will have its own 
arrangements, usually dependent on how much 
effort the local nobility put into organising security. A 
good, kind Lord might employ a regiment of trained 
footmen to carry out regular patrols; a poor or 
careless one might simply sweep the jails for thugs 
who can be paid in bounties and beer. In general, 
most of the law enforcement is done by the peasants. 
They will be told that when the constable or sheriff 
calls upon them all those who are able must take up 
arms and help. Overall, if you a8ract the a8ention of 
the ‘The Watch’ you don’t know if you are going to be 
caught by a mob of peasants, a well armed group of 
soldiers or basically ignored.
Can I fight The Watch?
The short answer is no. You have to accept the result 
of the roll - if you get a bad result it is assumed that 
enough Watchmen or militia have turned up to 
subdue even the strongest heroes. There are however 
some ways you can influence the result, but these 
carry the risk of making things worse.
• Test your LUCK: If successful, add 4 to your roll. 
If unsuccessful, deduct 2.
• A8empt to talk your way out of it: Make a test 
against your Con special skill or Law special skill. 
If you succeed, add 2 to your roll, if unsuccessful, 
deduct 2.
• Flee! Before making the roll, you take the most 
direct route possible out of your se8lement (deal 
with encounters as required) and leave. For every 
day you sleep rough outside the city, add 1 to your 
roll, but remember you need rations and must roll 
on the rough sleeping encounter table each night.


--- PAGE 87 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
86
Table 4.1.30 Lawbreaker Table
2d6 
What happens to you
2 
The Watch has had more than enough of your antics. You are jumped by a full squad armed with nets   
 
and mancatchers, tied up, beaten soundly and chucked in the dungeons for a week. The jailers pop in   
 
occasionally to give you a kick and a thump and the only food you get is mouldy bread and slops. You   
 
are reduced to 3 STAMINA points. When they boot you out all your equipment apart from your  
 
 
backpack, one weapon (or spellbook) and 2d6 Gold Pieces has been ‘confiscated’. When you complain   
 
about this, it’s pointed out to you that only the intervention of those you have helped before saved you   
 
from the gallows.  Disturbing the peace has consequences, as you now more clearly understand.
3 
Guess what? Nightsticks can be daysticks too! Dispensing with due process, you are first ne8ed and then 
given a hard beating accompanied by many surprisingly inventive insults. If you weren’t busy screaming 
in pain you might have enjoyed them. Your STAMINA is reduced to 4 points and your equipment is 
grabbed before the Watch, with a final kick to the kidneys, leaves you lying in a heap. Go through your 
bags. For each item, roll 1d6. If the result is an odd number, the Watch has taken it. Reduce your total 
gold by 10d6 gold pieces to a minimum of one.
4 
A large squad of Watchmen appear from the crowds and grab you. You are ‘escorted’ to the jail - that is  
your new starting location. A long and tedious interrogation, accompanied by some minor roughing up 
 
follows before you are chucked in the cells overnight. You are released the next day, but your STAMINA 
is reduced to 5 and your belongings have been picked over. For each item in your inventory, roll 1d6 - on 
a 1 or 2 it has been taken and 6d6 gold pieces were ‘lost’, apparently. Start your new day accordingly.
5 
You think you have go8en away with it, when suddenly it’s lights out as you are expertly coshed from  
behind. Lose 2 points of STAMINA (to a minimum of 2, the blow is not fatal). When you wake up you   
 
have been deposited outside the city wall, in the surrounding slums. Test against your LUCK. If you fail, 
you have been robbed - this means you lose 5d6 gold pieces and must roll for each item in your inventory 
- on a roll of 1 (on 1d6) it has been taken. Start your fresh new day at the city gate. If you succeed on your 
LUCK roll, the Watch has simply taken 3d6 gold pieces as a fine, but you still start your new day outside 
the city.
6 
You’ve been a very naughty boy, haven’t you? Someone has snitched about your location and a gang of 
Watchmen take the opportunity to pile on and subdue you. This is not done kindly and your STAMINA 
is reduced to 5. You are dragged to the jail and locked up overnight in a crowded cell. Test against your 
 
LUCK - if you fail you have contracted a nasty disease that will have you vomiting for a week - you can 
 
only gain 1 point of STAMINA per day from eating during this time. You are fined 6d6 gold pieces and   
 
let out the following morning. Start your new day from the Jail location.
7 
A squad of Watchmen has been looking for you for some time and are very upset by the time they find   
 
you. You are grabbed and pummelled - reduce your STAMINA to 6 points - whilst some of them go  
 
 
through your belongings. Lose 4d6 gold.
8 
The Watch jumps you and before you can fight back, claps you in irons. You are dragged off to spend the 
afternoon and evening in the stocks, where you are pelted with ro8en fruit, vegetables and the occasional 
decaying rat. Lose 2 points of STAMINA To a minimum of 2). Your next Leadership special skill roll is at 
-2 and your Etique8e special skill rolls are at -2 until you reach an inn or tavern and have a bath.


--- PAGE 88 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
87
9 
You are confronted by the Watch and a large number of crossbows pointed at you convince you to  
 
 
surrender. You are frogmarched to the jail (this is your new location) and spend the rest of the day  
 
 
‘negotiating’ with a captain, whilst other Watchmen are sent out to check up on you. You are let off with 
a fine of 4d6 gold pieces, but rumours of your skullduggery have been spread far and wide. Your next   
 
three Social skill rolls are at a penalty of -3. At the end of the day you are released from the jail and must 
make your way through the city at nigh8ime. Adjust encounters accordingly.
10 
A group of guardsmen have been alerted to your whereabouts and confront you on the street. They are  
 
heavily armed and armoured, and the hisses and boos you hear from passersby make it clear they have 
 
the support of the peasants. You decide to be nice and concede to their demands, which in this case is   
 
only a fine - deduct 3d6 gold pieces from your total.
11 
The Watch has apprehended you! Also, the Watch are exceedingly drunk! You can’t really work out what 
they are celebrating, but they are certainly taking the need to celebrate it very seriously. You quickly  
 
 
realise that you can get away with your crimes rather easily on this occasion. A round of drinks sets you 
back 1 gold piece, after which it is agreed that everything was a big misunderstanding. On your way!
12 
Your heart sinks as you see the Watch approaching at a trot but soars again a moment later as you  
 
 
recognise the lead woman. She’s an old friend from back home, you never expected to run into her here. 
She recognises you too and is delighted to see you again. The problems you’ve caused are quickly  
 
 
forgo8en as you both agree to meet up for a drink sometime. Move along to your next encounter with a 
 
broad grin on your face.
Call for the Watch!
If you are in the City and not in a catacomb (or other 
location where the Watchmen fear to tread) you may 
try to call out for help. It is worth noting that 
Watchmen in general are highly skilled at turning a 
blind eye to trouble that doesn’t involve them. If you 
cry out for help, make a test against your Leadership 
skill roll with a penalty of -3. In addition, look at the 
rules for your location - if there are modifiers to the 
Lawbreaker table roll, you also apply these to your 
Leadership roll. So if you call for the Watch whilst in 
the Slum Alley, your leadership roll has an additional 
-3 penalty, for a total penalty of -6! However, if you 
try to a8ract the a8ention of the Watch whilst at the 
Keep, you get a bonus of +4, for a total modifier of +1. 
If you do a8ract the a8ention of a helpful Watchman, 
they will come as a gang - they impose a -2 penalty on 
the SKILL of your enemy as they step in to fight 
beside you. The Watch do not fight for free though -  
they will take any treasure and items that are 
recovered from the enemy. It’s best not to argue about 
this!
Call for Aid!
 From time to time heroes might come across people 
they can convince to join their cause. This will be 
described in the text as ‘So-and-so says you may call 
upon their aid’. The hero may ask this person to fight 
alongside them, usually for one encounter only (as 
described in the text). The hero will have to make the 
combat rolls for them according to the standard rules 
and they will mimic the hero - if the hero flees, they 
flee too.
Important note: This feature is intended to provide 
some assistance to the heroes, not allow them to build 
up an army of followers! You should only have one of 
each type of person available to help you - so if you 
have already met a peasant today and persuaded 
them to help you, no more will be persuaded to help 
you until you have used their services.


--- PAGE 89 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
88
Stealing and thievery
Whilst not very heroic, some players may want to try 
their hand at larceny and the criminal life. There are 
two possible ways to go about this - using Sleight of 
Hand or Disguise and Con special skills. (This is 
separate from the brute force method of a8acking 
them with a weapon!)
Sleight of Hand - pickpocketing.
Should you wish to pickpocket your way around 
Titan, the following rules apply. Firstly, this can only 
be used in a social encounter - you can’t pickpocket a 
goblin that is trying to stab you. Secondly, if you 
choose this option it replaces other dialogue options. 
You can’t a8empt to pickpocket someone and then 
stand around having a chat with them, even if you are 
successful.
To make an a8empt, you should use an opposed 
SKILL test as detailed in the core rulebook. For the 
civilian their Awareness = their SKILL + 2. So if you 
tried to pickpocket an Acolyte, you would test your 
Sleight of Hand skill against their Awareness of 5+2 = 
7, using the ‘contested skill test’ rules. A critical 
failure on your part (rolling double one) or a critical 
success by them (rolling double six) means you have 
failed, no ma8er what your skill levels are!
Should you succeed, you have made off with 1d6 
gold pieces, completely unnoticed by your victim.
Should you fail, they have noticed your knavery and 
will proceed to loudly cry ‘thief! thief!’ in an a8empt 
to rouse the watch. You must test your LUCK. If 
successful you get away before the guards arrive - 
move your hero to an adjacent map location. If you 
fail, the watch has arrived and you must roll on the 
Lawbreaker table to see what happens to you.
Disguise and Con - the scam
In this scenario, you have decided to extort or con 
people into handing their money over. First of all you 
must create a disguise, which costs you 1gp in 
materials for every day that you use it. Dressed up as 
perhaps a tax collector or tithe taker, you are now 
ready for your scam. As with pickpocketing, you may 
only a8empt this on social encounters. You cannot 
scam/pickpocket the same target and if you a8empt 
to scam someone, you cannot use their other options. 
Firstly, make a Disguise skill roll - if you fail, they 
realise something is ‘off’ about you and leave before 
you can even start your pa8er. Next make a Con roll 
but with a -3 penalty as you are trying to get them to 
hand over money. If you succeed, they are convinced 
and hand over 1d6 gold pieces, and you may move 
on. If you fail, they have seen through this charade 
and will tell you to leave them alone. Once this 
happens, news gets around and it will not be possible 
to a8empt it again for one week. If you critically fail 
your Con roll they are sure this is criminal and cry 
‘Watch! Watch!” Roll on the Lawbreaker table.
Other restrictions
Clearly you must be sensible regarding your choice of 
victims. Trying to pickpocket a drunken dwarf is fine, 
trying to pickpocket or scam a leper is just 
unreasonable. Only one scam or pickpocket a8empt 
may be made per location per day.
The fast moving world of Titan
As you move around your location, you should end 
up with various bonuses or penalties to skills such as 
Bargain 
or 
Etique8e, 
which 
reflect 
your 
understanding of the layout of this place and the lives 
of its people. However, Titan is a fast moving and 
unpredictable world and the people's memories are 
short when it comes to showering them with praise or 
holding grudges. Should you leave a location for a 
day or more, you lose all these bonuses and penalties 
and start again with a fresh slate. 


--- PAGE 90 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
89
4.2 Se=lement Social Encounters
In this section are the ‘social encounters’, so called 
because it is usually possible to avoid combat and 
success is achieved by using social skills - Etique8e, 
Con, Bargain, Leadership and a few others. 
Each person you meet has a ‘Social Rank’. For more 
details on social rank and how it is used, see section 
7.2 ‘Social Status & Rank’. The important point to 
remember is that the difference in social rank acts as 
a modifier to skill tests for Etique8e, Con, Bargain or 
Leadership rolls. If your hero has a social rank of 5 
and they are talking to a Leper with social rank 2, 
they have a +3 bonus to their skill tests. If however 
they are talking to a Young Noble who has social rank 
7, they have a -2 penalty. Heroes start their 
adventures with a social rank of 3. Progress is made 
by completing adventures.
Heroes should also consider how long it takes to 
complete an encounter - if you are in hot pursuit of a 
villain, you may not have time to spend half an hour 
to an hour cha8ing with a washerwoman.
Temporary skill bonuses and penalties: Many of the 
encounters give you an opportunity to gain a bonus 
to a future skill use, though often at the risk of 
suffering a penalty. Such bonuses and penalties last 
until you use them (usually by making a skill test) or 
leave that se8lement for a day or more. Remember 
that if you want to retire to an inn or drinking den to 
‘wait it out’, you have to pay the cost of food and 
lodging. 
Call for Aid!
 From time to time heroes might come across people 
they can convince to join their cause. This will be 
described in the text as ‘So-and-so says you may call 
upon their aid’. The hero may ask this person to fight 
alongside them, usually for one encounter only (as 
described in the text). The hero will have to make the 
combat rolls for them according to the standard rules 
and they will mimic the hero - if the hero flees, they 
flee too.
Important note: This feature is intended to provide 
some assistance to the heroes, not allow them to build 
up an army of followers! You should only have one of 
each type of person available to help you - so if you 
have already met a peasant today and persuaded 
them to help you, no more will be persuaded to help 
you until you have used their services.
Table 4.2.1 Se=lement Social Encounters
S1 
Leper  
 
S24 
Farmer
S2  
Escaped Slave  
S25 
Suffering 
Penitent
S3 
Town Crier 
 
S26 
Group of
  
 
 
 
 
Noblewomen
S4 
Dwarf Pedlar  
S27 
Scavenger
S5 
Group of Traders 
S28 
Apothecary
S6 
Wedding Party 
S29 
Wandering Elf
S7 
Toady  
 
S30 
Nobleman
S8 
Trumpeter 
 
S31 
Mummers
S9 
Hag 
 
 
S32 
Fur Trader
S10 
Puppet Show  
S33 
Artisan
S11 
Squire  
 
S34 
Knight-Errant
S12 
Desperate Chef 
S35 
Night 
Watchman
S13 
Glu8onous Merchant S36 
Tithe Collector
S14 
Servant 
 
S37 
Friar
S15 
Young Noble  
S38 
Witchsniffer
S16 
Burnt Out Building 
S39 
Messenger
S17 
Drunken Dwarf 
S40 
Children
S18 
Peasant 
 
S41 
Beggar
S19 
Acolyte 
 
S42 
Townsfolk
S20 
Priest  
 
S43 
Student
S21 
Surly Watchmen 
S44 
Soldier
S22 
Rowdy Barbarian 
S45 
Con Artist
S23 
Pie Seller 
 
S46 
Dying Man


--- PAGE 91 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
90
Standard Encounter Options
As a reminder, in Chapter 3 we detailed a number of 
encounter options. A hero may wish to use this (or 
others they can think of) to deal with the challenges 
they face.
Table 3.1.1 Standard Encounter Options - 
see descriptions in Chapter 3 for more details.
Option  
Action
Fight  
Begin combat and resolve it using the 
normal combat rules, you may use a  
 
ranged weapon or spell in the first   
 
round if you have spo8ed your target.
Flee 
 
Run from combat; test your LUCK to  
 
 
escape or suffer a ‘free hit’.
Sneak  
A8empt to use Sneaking to get past   
 
 
your target, consider what bonuses or 
 
 
penalties apply.
Talk 
 
Use a social skill, you must share a   
 
 
means of communication with your   
 
 
target.
Trick  
A8empt to Trick your target in some  
way, a variety 
of means 
including 
magic can be 
used.
Bribe  
Offer your 
target an 
amount of 
gold to ignore 
your actions.
Feed 
 
Offer an 
animal food in  
 
order to  
 
 
distract it.
S1 Leper
SKILL   
4 
STAMINA  
5 
Social Rank:  
2 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Unarmed
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Hunched against the side of a building with their 
begging bowl next to them is the sad figure of a leper. 
His hands and face are wrapped in dirty bandages 
that do not quite conceal the ravages of the disease. 
A small bell is tied on a rope around their neck, to 
warn strangers not to approach too closely. As you 
pass by, they reach out a hand and ask if you can 
spare a coin or two. What do you do? 
● This man has a terrible affliction and you are fearful 
of it. Pulling your cape across your face and holding 
your breath, you scurry past as quickly as possible. 
● This terrible affliction has no cure, but you can ease 
their suffering. Being careful 
not to touch them, you place 2 
gold pieces into their begging 
bowl and offer up a prayer to 
whatever 
gods 
may 
be 
listening. The leper thanks 
you; you may call upon their 
aid once whilst in this city, 
but only if you are in Slum 
Alley, Graveyard, Dump or 
Infirmary locations. 
● 
Their 
very 
presence 
threatens you and everyone 
else! You curse them and 
strike out with your weapon, 
telling them to begone! The 
leper cries out and, grabbing 
his bowl, shuffles off in a 
pathetic fashion.


--- PAGE 92 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
91
S2 Escaped Slave
SKILL   
4 
STAMINA  
4 
Social Rank:  
2 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Unarmed
A8acking this person is not an Unlawful Action.
A pathetic whimpering noise catches your a8ention. 
You look around and realise that what you thought 
was a pile of refuse is a person, dressed in ta8ered 
rags and with a set of heavy manacles on their wrists.
You can see they have been branded on their face and 
arms, meaning that they must be an escaped slave. 
They look up at you and plead for a li8le bit of food 
or gold, for they are starving. What do you do? 
● Pass them a bit of food (deduct one rations from 
your inventory) and move on. You don’t have time to 
deal with their troubles. 
● The manacles are large but ill-made. You offer to try 
and break them off - make a SKILL test using the 
Strength or Locks special skill. If you succeed the 
slave is truly grateful and you may call upon their aid 
once at a later point, when in the slums or garbage 
heap locations. 
● Slavery is a ro8en 
business, but not 
your 
business. 
Sighing, you move 
on to your next 
encounter. 
● An escaped slave 
is 
probably 
a 
criminal. You draw 
your weapon and 
move to a8ack. Due 
to their status in 
society this is not 
treated 
as 
an 
Unlawful Action.
S3 Town Crier
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Hear Ye! Hear Ye! The town crier is making his 
rounds just as you happen to be passing by. Clanging 
his bell to announce the start, he has news to tell of 
goings on in this place and also from the wider lands 
hereabout. The fellow is wide of belly and red of face, 
dressed up in a ta8y livery that has definitely seen 
be8er days. His voice is strong though and a small 
crowd of people stop to listen to his pronouncements. 
What do you do? 
● Sit and listen for a while. This could be a moment to 
eat some rations, or just rest your weary legs. You 
may roll on the ‘Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & Events’ 
table (Chapter 8), this applies in addition to other 
rumours & events you are experiencing 
● You listen to the Crier but also decide to work the 
crowd a bit to find out what people think of today's 
news. You may make an Etique8e Special Skill roll. If 
successful you gain +1 to your next City lore skill test 
from your information collection work. 
● You listen half-heartedly but you are mostly 
thinking about turning this to your advantage. As he 
finishes you approach the Crier and offer him a bribe 
to include news of your heroism in his next 
announcement! Make a Bribery Special Skill roll. If 
successful you must deduct 2d6gp but your next two 
Leadership or Etique8e skill rolls will gain a bonus of 
+2 as news of your valour travels around the city. 
● You have no time to listen to ti8le-ta8le. Shoving 
your way through the crowd you head onward. 
● You decide to take advantage of a distracted crowd 
to do a bit of pickpocketing. Make a test of your 
Sleight of Hand skill. If you succeed, gain 2d6gp but 
if you fail roll on the Lawbreaker table.


--- PAGE 93 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
92
S4 Dwarf Pedlar
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
Mail Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Handaxe
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
From the corner of your eye you spot what appears to 
be a living backpack. Huffing and clanking along is a 
large leather pack festooned with all manner of 
things; bits of armour, pots and pans, some 
tradesman's tools and at least one sword. 
Looking more closely you can see a pair of hobnail 
boots shuffling away underneath and above them 
what may be the tip of a shaggy beard. This strange 
creature stops next to a stone bench and with a huge 
sigh the dwarven pedlar puts down the pack that had 
almost entirely hidden him. 
He takes a swig of something from a flask, lays out a 
ta8y blanket on the ground and quickly starts placing 
his wares upon it. What do you do? 
● You have no need for knick-knacks such as these. 
You pass quickly on to your next encounter. 
● There’s no harm in having a look. You stop and 
browse his wares. You may purchase any piece of 
‘general equipment’ here at the normal cost, or sell 
any small items you have up to a value of 5gp 
● This fellow must know a thing or two about the 
world - you decide to engage him in conversation. 
Make an Etique8e skill roll, with a +2 bonus if you are 
willing to offer him one of your rations. If successful 
you gain a +2 bonus on your next City Lore skill roll
S5 Group of Traders
(Three Traders in all)
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
5 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
You come across a group of local traders and 
craftsmen, who are having a spot of lunch and a few 
no doubt well earned tankards of ale whilst 
discussing business ma8ers. Although not at their 
stalls, this could be a good opportunity to get to know 
some of them and find out how the local economy is 
going, or just pick up some gossip. What do you do? 
● They seem to be happy on their own and you don’t 
feel like cha8ing. Leave them be and move on to your 
next encounter. 
● Ask if you can join them for a bit. Deduct one ration 
or pay 2gp for your meal. You may make an Etique8e 
special skill roll to see how well you get along - if 
successful you have got the inside track on a few 
deals and may have a +2 bonus to your next Bargain 
special skill roll. 
● You are not interested in trading but these people 
must know their way around. Offer to buy them a 
drink whilst you pump them for information. Deduct 
2gp but add +2 to your next City Lore roll 
● These soft goldmongers don’t know the dangers 
you face to protect their way of life and it’s past time 
they got a taste of it! Smash your fist onto their table 
and with a hoarse growl let them know how lucky 
they are. Make a Con Special skill roll. If successful, 
gain a +1 bonus to your next Bargain Special Skill roll 
due to your fearsome reputation.


--- PAGE 94 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
93
S6 Wedding party
(6 peasants in all)
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Unarmed
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
In a world full of horror and misery it is pleasant to 
come across a merry sight from time to time. A 
wedding ceremony has just finished and the party, all 
in good spirits, are making their way to some house 
or inn to continue the celebrations. The bride and 
groom are at the centre of the group, holding hands 
and smiling at each other whilst all around them their 
friends and relations chat and laugh. What do you 
do? 
● Curse them for their happiness and spit at the feet 
of the revellers. They look at you for a moment, 
shocked by your rudeness, before moving away 
hurriedly. Lose 1 point of LUCK, but your next Con 
skill roll gains a +2 bonus as word of your vicious 
nature spreads. 
● Cheered by this sight you step forward and press 
2d6 gold coins into the hands of the newlyweds, 
wishing them all happiness. Gain 1 point of LUCK. 
● Although a pleasant thing, it's really none of your 
business. Ignore them and move onto your next 
encounter. 
● A wedding means valuable presents, right? You 
may a8empt a Sleight of Hand special skill roll to rob 
one of them as they pass. There is a penalty of -2 to 
a8empt this theft due to the size of the crowd. If you 
succeed, gain 1d6 gold pieces. If you fail you are 
spo8ed and given some hard kicks before you 
manage to escape - lose 1d3 points of STAMINA.
S7 Toady
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
5 (+1 if a bribe of 1d6gp is offered)
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
If a8acked, the Toady will a8empt to flee on the first 
round. See below.
A well dressed man catches your eye, even though he 
seems to be trying to lurk in the shadows. He is 
looking around nervously and rubbing his hands 
together as if suffering from the cold and seems to be 
giving furtive glances left and right as though he is 
expecting someone. Looking him up and down you 
note that the clothes are well made but also well used, 
and have patches in some places and his skin is pallid 
and sickly. Still, the fellow might be a useful source of 
information. Perhaps you should question him? 
● He looks too shifty to trust, leave him about his 
business and move on to your next encounter. 
● A8empt to engage him in conversation by 
pretending that you know what he is up to; make a 
roll using the Con special skill. If successful you learn 
something to your advantage and gain a +2 bonus to 
your next City Lore roll, though if you fail the Con 
skill test the toady lies to you and your next City Lore 
roll has a -2 penalty. 
● Hand on weapon, you try to corner this chump - 
but he has no stomach for this sort of thing and flees, 
flinging a small coin purse at you as a distraction. 
Gain 1d6 gold pieces and Move on to your next 
encounter. He is too much of a coward to report you, 
so you don’t need to roll on the Lawbreaker table 
unless you encounter the toady a second time in this 
location.


--- PAGE 95 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
94
S8 Trumpeter
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You spy a young man, dressed in livery and carrying 
a trumpet. Clearly some sort of herald, he is currently 
taking his leisure and enjoying a mug of small ale 
whilst watching the world go by. Not a particularly 
unusual sight, but it occurs to you that a herald could 
overhear a lot of things in the course of his work and 
might be a good source of information.  What do you 
do? 
● March over and knock the mug of ale away, making 
it clear that he needs to spill the beans or there will be 
trouble. Make a Con skill roll. If successful you gain a 
+2 bonus to your next City Lore roll in this location. If 
unsuccessful the lad walks away smirking at you, 
take a -2 penalty to your next social skill roll in this 
location. 
● You give him a li8le nod to say hello but otherwise 
leave him alone to enjoy his day. Move on to your 
next encounter. 
● Stop and join him for a drink a8empting to engage 
him in conversation. Make a skill roll (Bargain may be 
used). If successful you gain some useful tidbit of 
information that will give you a +2 on your next social 
Skill roll. If unsuccessful the conversation goes 
nowhere and he eventually makes his excuses and 
leaves, leaving you with a 3gp bill for the drinks.
● Hire his services? Make a Bargain skill roll, if you 
succeed he will, for a 2gp fee, accompany you for the 
rest of the day and announce your presence with a 
fanfare, granting you a +2 bonus to any two Etique8e 
or Leadership skill tests but making it impossible to 
use the Sneaking skill. You can dismiss him at any 
time. If you fail the Bargain skill test he is too busy to 
help you out.
S9 Hag
SKILL   
3
STAMINA  
7
MAGIC 
3 (Devotion 5)
Social Rank:  
2
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
What seems to be a pile of rags turns out on closer 
inspection to be an elderly woman, si8ing on a low 
stool, clothed in layer after layer of patched and 
repaired robes. She is giving you a toothless grin and 
beckoning you over. ‘Come and have your fortune 
told, traveller’ she rasps at you with a voice like the 
crackling of dried leaves, flourishing a ta8ered pack 
of tarot cards in her other hand. What do you do?
● You don’t believe in this sort of baloney. Move on 
to your next encounter. 
● You are intrigued. Si8ing next to her, you pass her 
a gold piece. She shuffles her Tarot expertly and lays 
out the cards, explaining as she goes, showing you a 
glimpse of what fortune has in store for you. Roll 1d6: 
1-2 your future looks troubled and you must deduct 
one LUCK point. 3-5 the cards reveal a rosy outlook 
and you may restore one LUCK point. On a 6, a 
glorious career awaits you. Restore one LUCK and 
you gain +1 to your SKILL in your next combat. 
● You go over, but tell her you would rather have 
information than your fortune told. She still asks you 
to cross her palm with gold and if you do so will 
reveal some of her secrets. You gain +2 on your next 
City Lore Special Skill roll. 
● She’s a witch! Get her! You draw your weapon and 
advance grimly on this servant of darkness. Her eyes 
widen and she gives out a scream before fleeing with 
surprising speed for one so ancient. This is an 
Unlawful Action and you must now immediately 
leave this location or roll on the Lawbreaker table. If 
you encounter the Witchsniffer you may give him the 
location of this hag to avoid him.


--- PAGE 96 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
95
S10 Puppet Show
(Two A3endants ) 
(Puppeteer)
SKILL   
5 
 
6
STAMINA  
7 
 
9
Social Rank:  
3  
 
3
Armour:  
None   
Leather Cuirass
Weapon:  
Unarmed 
Club
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
The squeak-squeak cries of ‘that's the way you do it!’ 
and a red and white pin-striped booth warns you that 
someone has set up a puppet show to ‘entertain’ the 
children of the area. A small crowd of excited 
youngsters has indeed gathered and seem to be 
enjoying the show whilst bored parents stand around 
the edges of the crowd, gossiping amongst 
themselves. A grubbily dressed boy moves amongst 
them holding out a hat and asking for pennies.
 What do you do? 
● This sort of thing just annoys you. Shuffle past as 
quickly as possible. Move on to your next encounter. 
● Stop and watch the show for a while. Make an 
Awareness skill test. If successful you notice that as 
the boy goes around asking for pennies there is a girl 
moving amongst the crowd picking pockets! You 
may sound the alarm or ignore it. If you ignore it, 
move on to your next encounter. If you cry ‘Thief! 
Thief!’ the girl and boy make a dash for it, quickly 
slipping away into the crowd, but the ‘actor’ in the 
booth comes out with a club in hand and charges at 
you! You must fight. If you defeat him you win the 
thanks of the crowd for your honesty and the extra 
entertainment of the fight. Add +2 to your next social 
skill roll as your reputation spreads. If you failed 
your Awareness test, you are unfortunately a victim 
of the ‘dipper’ and must deduct 1g from your cash. 
What a show!
S11 Squire
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
One of the best jobs for a boy is to be apprenticed to a 
noble as their squire. A general servant and dogsbody 
who will run around after them and in return learn 
the social and martial skills needed to be a member of 
the upper class of society. It is not uncommon to see 
them around town, noticeable by their a8ire, and you 
have spo8ed one such lad hurrying about his 
errands. For a moment he notices you and pauses, 
probably wondering if you are a strangely dressed 
peasant or somebody that he should be bowing to. 
The confused look on his face is quite comical. What 
do you do? 
● You doubt that a child could be of any help to you. 
Move on to your next encounter. 
● You decide to tease him a bit. Quickly drawing 
yourself up straight you play the role of an affronted 
noble, telling him off and demanding an apology for 
his rudeness. Make a Con skill roll, if you succeed he 
is convinced and grovels before you! The squire 
offers to help you for a while. At your next location, 
instead of rolling randomly for an encounter, you 
may choose a specific social (not map or challenge) 
encounter, as the squire fetches a person to meet you. 
If you fail the Con roll, he is unconvinced by your 
performance and simply nods at you before moving 
off. 
● Although he is but a child, he is out and about in the 
city and talks to the other squires as well. You greet 
him and ask him what he is up to. Make an Etique8e 
skill roll. If you succeed you draw them into 
conversation and may add +1 to your next City Lore 
roll. If you fail, they are suspicious and shuffle off 
before you can learn anything.


--- PAGE 97 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
96
S12 Desperate Chef
(Three Dwarven Cooks)
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
8
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Cleaver (Hand Axe)
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You are walking along a cobbled street when a nearby 
door flies open. Coming through it is a dwarf dressed 
in chef’s clothing - an apron covered in food stains 
and a huge white hat that is barely staying on his 
head. In his hand he carries a cleaver dripping with 
meat juices. A waft of cooking smells blows out with 
him making your mouth water. The cook looks 
around, fixes his eyes on you and says ‘You there! The 
Earl has arrived for lunch and we’re shorthanded  
help us out for a few hours and I’ll treat you to the 
tastiest supper you’ve had!’  What do you do? 
● You’re an adventurer not a kitchen hand! Wave this 
bothersome cook away and carry on with your day. 
Move on to your next encounter. 
● Sounds like a good deal...you pitch in with the 
chopping, pot-washing and stirring for the afternoon. 
The other kitchen staff are very cha8y dwarves and 
are happy to talk about the local area. This 
knowledge means you may re-roll your next 
encounter, plus the chef does reward you with a 
hearty meal! In addition, if you succeed in a 
Leadership roll you spend the evening thrilling the 
cooks with tales of your heroism - you may call upon 
the aid of a dwarven cook once whilst in the Streets, 
Wealthy Streets, Tavern or Inn locations. 
● You accept the offer and chuckle evilly to yourself 
as you go into the kitchen. This dwarf will pay for not 
recognising your status. You deliberately put too 
much salt in the soup, stir some muck into the sauce 
and ‘accidentally’ knock over the waiter carrying the 
roast. By the end of the day the chef is in tears and an 
angry argument can be heard from the restaurant. 
S13 Glu=onous Merchant
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
7 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You are taking a moment on a bench seat to quietly 
recover from the strains of the adventuring life when 
you are disturbed by the plompf of a heavy weight  
landing on the other end. You crack open your eyes 
enough to see that a very large man dressed in the 
a8ire of a merchant has sat down next to you and is 
busy tucking into a large pla8er of food - roast bird, 
bread, a bit of stew and gravy, steamed cabbage - 
there seems to be a bit of everything in this pile. The 
merchant already has a bit of grease dribbling down 
his chin, but he offers you a cheery hello and seems 
willing to talk (between mouthfuls). He even offers 
you a bit of his dinner to share.  What do you do? 
● Accept the food and the offer of some company. 
You spend the rest of the day talking, drinking and 
eating with this merchant who has many tales to tell 
you about the coming and goings of the local 
economy. Deduct 1g for the food and drink, but gain 
a 50% discount on your next non-magical purchase 
from his tips. 
● This merchant should have let you rest. With a 
great heave you flip the bench seat up and over 
causing the blusterer to sprawl across the floor of the 
inn, landing atop his dinner. Make a Con roll. If 
successful he apologises profusely for disturbing you 
and scu8les off to clean himself up. Add +1 to your 
next Con roll as your reputation gets around. 
● No one should be so bold as to approach a killer like 
you so casually. A8ack him immediately - but he is 
no fighter and flees at the sight of your weapon. The 
kerfuffle has disturbed some of the locals and you can 
hear them mu8ering about calling the Watch. Move 
on to another location before things get serious.


--- PAGE 98 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
97
S14 Servant 
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
It is not unusual to see servants, alone or in groups, 
hurrying about completing chores for their masters. 
Most of the time you ignore them but this woman has 
caught your a8ention. 
She is dressed in the usual servant garb - leather 
boots, woollen clothing in several layers, a cloth cap 
and is carrying a lidded basket which probably 
contains firewood or clothes for washing, you can’t 
tell at the moment. 
Something about her manner is unusual, she is a bit 
bolder than most of the downtrodden workers you 
see and isn’t put off by your obvious aura of danger. 
As you look over, you see that she is also looking 
back at you with curiosity. What do you do? 
● People stare at you all the time, mostly due to the 
scars and weapons. Pay her no mind and continue 
with your day. 
● Servants are a good source of information. You 
approach and try to make small talk. Make a test 
using the Etique8e skill. If successful you may roll on 
Table 8.7 Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & Events and 
gain +1 to your next City Lore test in this location. 
● It’s rude of her to stare. You snarl at her and make 
a motion as if you are about to draw your weapons. 
Make a test against Etique8e. If you succeed she 
drops her basket and runs off. If you fail she is 
startled, but simply turns away. Either way, it is 
unclear what you have achieved.
S15 Young Noble 
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
10
Social Rank:  
7
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Short Sword
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Before you stands a young man dressed in the 
expensive clothing of a noble: A blue silk shirt, 
leather trousers and boots, a belt with a silver buckle 
and a dark velvet cloak. He has a fencing sword 
strapped at his hip and an expression of mild 
contempt on his face. His every movement tells you 
that he is looking for an opportunity to show off his 
swordsmanship. What do you do? 
● Compliment him on his fashion sense - test your 
Etique8e, if successful the noble will offer to buy you 
a drink! If you meet another noble on this visit to 
civilization, add +1 to any social rolls as your good 
name has circulated. If you fail, your a8empted 
compliment backfires and he insults you - your next 
social skill roll is at -1 due to embarrassment. 
● Insult him - make a Con roll - if successful he 
scurries away, but if you fail, he a8acks you and you 
must fight (It is not Unlawful to defend yourself). 
● Challenge him to a duel: He will readily accept, 
swishing his sword around with anticipation. You 
can ask for or offer surrender at any point - he will 
surrender if below 4 STAMINA. If you surrender he 
will accept but viciously cut your face as he does so - 
you suffer -1 Etique8e for a week as it heals. If you 
duel to the death it is an Unlawful Action and you 
will need to roll on the ‘Lawbreaker’ table. 
● A8empt to inspire him with your tales of 
adventure: Make a Leadership roll. If you succeed 
you can call upon his aid once whilst in the Streets, 
Wealthy Streets, Inn or Tavern locations. He will fight 
with you for one combat. If you fail, he mocks your 
puny achievements and saunters off to tell his friends 
about you. Your next Leadership skill test is at -1.


--- PAGE 99 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
98
S16 Burnt Out building
Your nose alerts you to something of interest before 
you see it. A strong smell of smoke is wafting up from 
the smouldering remains of what was probably a 
small house or shop. It has collapsed in upon itself, or 
been knocked down by fire wardens to prevent the 
fire from spreading and is now a chaotic pile of 
broken and burnt timbers, wall sections, tiling and 
furniture. You have clearly arrived some time after 
the fire was extinguished as the only people paying 
a8ention to this mess at the moment are you and a 
few soot covered children picking away at the 
wreckage. There are no immediate signs of the 
former occupants. What would you like to do? 
● This is just some sort of domestic accident, not of 
any interest - move on to your next encounter. 
● Some poor family lost their home today. Talking to 
the children you find out that they know them, so you 
offer a couple of gold pieces from your pouch, 
trusting them to pass it on. Deduct 2 GP from your 
inventory. Word of your generosity spreads fast and 
you may add +2 to your next Etique8e test in this 
se8lement. 
● Maybe these children are onto something? Pulling 
a bit of cloth across your face you start to hunt around 
in the wreckage. Make an Awareness special skill test. 
If you succeed you find a keepsake worth 1sp. Taking 
your loot you sidle off, leaving behind a trail of ash 
and smuts. You may want to clean your boots at some 
point.
 ● Perhaps the gods will help? You stop, get down to 
your knees and spend a few minutes in thoughtful 
prayer, asking the gods to intercede. Roll 1d6 - on a 
roll of 5 or 6, this house will be rebuilt as a workshop 
(encounter M26) within 2d6 days. You may choose 
the type of workshop and will always receive a 20% 
discount when using its services.
S17 Drunken Dwarf
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
Mail Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Warhammer
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You hear a noise that you think at first might be 
someone choking, but it turns out to be a red-faced 
dwarf, singing loudly and waving around a half-full 
tankard of ale. In his other hand he holds a small cask 
from which he occasionally takes a top up. It is clear 
from his staggering approach that he has been 
celebrating for some time and is feeling the effects. He 
is dressed in a blue co8on shirt and breeches tucked 
underneath a chainmail shirt. A heavy warhammer 
hangs from a loop on his belt. He has a large foam 
flecked beard of curly red whiskers, and a mop of 
curly hair above a pair of twinkling citrine coloured 
eyes.  The dwarf is clearly in a very good mood and 
offers you a hearty greeting. What do you do? 
● Accept his greeting and share a drink with him, 
telling each other tales of adventure. Make an 
Etique8e skill roll, on a success he will gift you his 
tankard. It is a heavy pewter tankard, embossed with 
pictures of dwarves ba8ling goblins and has the 
le8ers ‘MM’ inscribed on the base. On a failure, you 
depart as friends but with no exchange of gifts. 
● Acknowledge his greeting but slide away at the first 
opportunity; move on to your next encounter. 
● Cuff him away and insult his singing; make a Con 
skill roll; if successful he gulps down a big swallow of 
ale and scurries away, on a failure he throws the 
remains of his cup in your face and walks off 
laughing. Your next Con roll is at -1. 
● Throwing your arm around him, you decide to join 
in the party. The rest of the night is lost to a haze of 
alcohol and song, you wake up the next day in a 
random location in the city. Miraculously unharmed 
but with 3d6gp less in your pocket.


--- PAGE 100 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
99
S18 Peasant
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
The world is teeming with peasants - those people 
who are just scraping by through a combination of 
common skills and physical labour, whether it be 
assisting a craftsman, digging the crops or just 
standing in a field minding the pigs, most people you 
pass in the street fall into this category. In general you 
go by with just a nod or greeting, but sometimes you 
stop for a longer chat. On this occasion you have 
come across a likely fellow, leaning up against a post 
with a pot of small beer in one hand and the general 
air of a man who is looking for a lost goat, but taking 
his time about it. What do you do? 
● No harm in taking a break. You decide to stop and 
chat with them about nothing in particular - you can 
make a roll on the Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & 
Events tables. 
● This lad might have seen something interesting 
whilst he was standing here. Make an Etique8e roll. 
If successful he turns out to be a mine of useful 
information and you gain a +1 bonus to your next 
City Lore or Etique8e roll. If unsuccessful, all you get 
out of him is a series of drawn out ‘yaarrs’ as it 
becomes clear he has had a few too many beers. 
● Many peasants dream of living the adventuring life, 
maybe this one is up for it. You decide to inspire 
them, telling tales of daring feats, terrible combat and 
rich rewards. Make a Leadership roll. If you succeed, 
they will help you for a short time - they will assist 
you by providing either a +1 to your combat roll or 
social skills rolls in this location for the rest of today, 
after which they will get back to whatever duties their 
employer requires. If you leave this location, the 
bonus is lost as they go back to their work.
S19 Acolyte
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Hurrying past you so close that you have to take a 
step aside to avoid a collision, a robed woman catches 
your eye. She stops to apologise for her haste and 
quickly explains that she has some urgent duties at 
the Temple, and that the gods must not be kept 
waiting. You notice that she has some symbols 
stitched into her clothing and some jewellery that 
might or might not have a deeper meaning - make a 
Religion Lore roll with a +2 bonus. If you succeed, 
you have identified which god she serves and have +2 
to all social skill tests for this encounter (or, if you are 
the same religion, automatically succeed).  To find 
out what religion they belong to, refer to section 7.1 
which sets out how to choose a specific god for a 
temple or priest, or you can simply choose a religion 
that is appropriate for your se8ing.   As she has now 
stopped to talk to you, what do you want to do? 
● Her god is not your god. You ask her to watch 
where she is going in future and you move on. 
● Engage her in conversation about her faith. Make 
an Etique8e special skill roll. If you succeed she is so 
pleased by this conversation she promises to pray for 
you at her Temple. During your next combat, you 
gain +1 bonus to your combat rolls from this blessing. 
● Religion is for the weak willed, a fact you can use to 
your advantage. Make a Con roll. If you succeed, you 
have convinced her that you are also a follower and 
on a secret mission that needs her help. She will offer 
you either a donation of 2d6 gold pieces or the chance 
to call upon her aid. You must choose one option 
now. If you fail your Con roll, she sees through your 
ruse and turns away haughtily, promising to warn 
others about you. Lose 1 point of LUCK.


--- PAGE 101 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
100
S20 Priest
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
10
MAGIC 
4 (Devotion 6)
Social Rank:  
6 (see below)
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk
Weapon:  
Staff
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You spy an older man dressed in long pa8erned robes 
and a similarly decorated satin hat. He is holding a 
carved staff and talking to a group of nervous looking 
peasants. After a few moments he dismisses them 
and, as he turns to leave, notices you studying him. 
His clothes and staff mark him out as a person of 
distinction, but behind the hefty grey beard a 
welcoming smile has appeared and it looks like you 
have a chance to talk to him before he moves on.
Firstly, you should make a Religion Lore roll with a 
bonus of +4 (priests do not generally try to hide their 
religion) and if you succeed, you know which god he 
follows and you gain +2 bonus to your social skill 
rolls for the remainder of this encounter (or, if you are 
the same religion, automatically succeed).
To find out what religion they belong to, refer to 
section 7.1 which sets out how to choose a specific 
god for a temple or priest, or you can simply choose 
a religion that is appropriate for your se8ing.
Now that you have the priest’s a8ention, what do you 
do? 
● Meeting an actual priest is a stroke of good fortune 
as you are in need of healing; you beseech him to 
mend your wounds. Make an Etique8e or Religion 
Lore roll - if you succeed he will heal you for 6 points 
of STAMINA. If you fail, he tells you that others are 
in greater need and bids you hurry to the hospital. 
● Falling to one knee, you profess your joy at meeting 
a true servant of the gods; you offer him a donation of 
2d6 gold pieces for his Temple (deduct this from your 
total). The old priest places his hand on your head 
and offers up a prayer of blessing; roll 1d6 - on a 5 or 
6 the gods have listened and you gain +1 point of 
LUCK. 
● He may look friendly, but priests are known to be 
cunning and greedy too! You nod at him before 
swiftly moving on to your next encounter. 
● Temples have resources that could be of use to you 
and a priest will have the keys. You can try to 
convince this priest to offer you some aid - make a 
Leadership or Con special skill test with a -2 penalty. 
If you succeed, the priest gives you a vial of holy 
water - you can use it to instantly deal 2d6 points of 
damage to any undead monsters you meet (it has one 
use only). If you fail, the priest tells you that other 
causes are more needy and shoos you away.
 ● If you are injured you may ask for healing. If you 
are dedicated (you are a priest, paladin or avowed 
follower) to the same religion as this priest, or to a 
religion of the same broad alignment (good, neutral, 
evil) they will heal you for 6 points of STAMINA 
damage. If you are not openly dedicated to a similar 
religion you must test your LUCK to receive this 
healing. 
● Engage them in a discussion about religious 
ma8ers, something priests are always happy to do. 
After 1d3 hours you are able to bring the 
conversation to an end, but you do receive +2 to your 
next Religious Lore roll.


--- PAGE 102 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
101
S21 Surly Watchmen
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
10
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
Mail Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Halberd
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You have inadvertently caught the a8ention of two 
watchmen, who were standing about carefully 
avoiding any trouble to disturb their day. Dressed in 
armour and each carrying a wicked looking halberd, 
they saunter over and ask you what your business is. 
They don’t seem particularly aggressive, just a bit 
bored but interested in what a stranger like you is up 
to. What do you do? 
● Tell them you are a simple traveller going about 
your business and promise you aren’t going to cause 
any problems. Move on to your next encounter. 
● Tell them you are a bit lost and ask them for 
directions - make an Etique8e roll. If successful they 
give you a few directions and you gain +1 to your 
next City Lore roll. If unsuccessful they give you just 
one direction - be on your way. 
● Ge8ing The Watch on your side would be very 
helpful - you explain your predicament and try to 
convince them to help you. It is difficult, as they 
would rather go to a tavern than help a dangerous 
adventurer. Make a Law skill roll with a -3 penalty. If 
successful you may call upon the aid of one 
watchman once in this se8lement (but not in the 
Catacombs). If unsuccessful they are suspicious of 
your plans and demand you move on immediately - 
you must move to another location at once.
S22 Rowdy Barbarian
SKILL   
8
STAMINA  
12
Social Rank:  
2
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Great Axe
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
It is hard to ignore the extremely large wild haired 
man, dressed in furs and leather, that is striding 
toward you. Across his shoulders lies a large and 
wicked looking axe and as he approaches you he 
takes an enormous gulp of beer from a tankard before 
tossing it carelessly over his shoulder. 
Pulling his axe down to his side and stamping it onto 
the ground the barbarian points at you and speaks. 
‘You there, adventurer - come and show your worth! 
Stand and fight me if you dare!’. 
You notice a small crowd of bored peasants has 
appeared, seemingly from nowhere, to watch this 
exciting turn of events.  What do you do?
● Oh, this looks bad. Before things have a chance to 
get worse, you turn and shove your way through the 
crowd and dash away as the laughter of the barbarian 
echoes in your ears. Move to your next location. 
● Smiling, you offer a terse ‘very well’ and accept the 
challenge. Fight 4 rounds of combat with the 
barbarian. Whoever has lost the most STAMINA in 
that time is the loser. If you win, the barbarian thanks 
you for the challenge and offers to buy you a drink. 
Gain +2 to your next Leadership skill roll. If you lose, 
the barbarian still offers to buy you a drink and you 
part as friends. In the case of a draw, you may either 
move on to your next encounter or fight another 3 
rounds of combat. 
● Snarling, you draw your weapons. This fool should 
not have disturbed you and now they will pay. You 
fight the barbarian to the death. The crowd of 
peasants was excited by the prospect of some action, 


--- PAGE 103 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
102
but left horrified at the casual manner in which you 
dispatched your opponent. Add +2 to your next Con 
roll as word of your savage nature gets around the 
local area. 
● You are a poet, not a fighter: You try to persuade 
this hefty drunkard to put down his weapons and 
come for a drink. Make an Etique8e skill roll with a 
+3 bonus if you have any alcohol to offer him as a 
bribe. If you succeed, he recognises you as some kind 
of bard and agrees to swap life stories: you gain +2 to 
your next Forest or Mountain Lore roll. If you fail, he 
is angered by your a8empt at friendliness. He grabs 
you mid sentence and hurls you across the ground 
leaving you in a crumpled heap. Your next 
Leadership skill roll is at -2 as your confidence also 
tumbles.
S23 Pie Seller
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Improvised (Hot Pies, scalding gravy 
causes 1 point of burning damage each 
hit)
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
‘Pies for sale! Hot pies for sale! Get’em before they’re 
cold, get’em before they’re all sold!’ Comes the cry of 
a wandering pie seller. Dressed in peasant garb, but 
with a greasy apron across the front, a young woman 
is carrying a cloth lined wooden tray filled to the brim 
with a wide selection of pastry topped pies. They are 
evidently freshly cooked as steam rises from them 
and a mouth-watering smell of cooked meat and 
pastry fills the air. What do you do? 
● You’ve no need for food just now, so you move on 
to your next encounter with a grumbling stomach. 
● Buy a delicious pie, of course! For the cost of 1gp 
you can acquire a large and tasty meat pie. Roll a 1d6 
when you eat it - on a roll of 1 you have unfortunately 
ended up with a bit more sewer rat in your pie than 
expected, and you spit it out in disgust (the pie seller 
has moved on by this point - no refunds). On a 2-6 
you get a delicious pie which restores 3 points of 
stamina (and counts as one of your meals for today). 
Yum yum. 
● You want a pie but don’t feel like paying for it. You 
can a8empt a Con skill roll with a -3 penalty to 
wheedle a free pie out of her. If you fail, she is 
disgusted with your begging and moves on. If you 
get a pie, make a roll as above. 
● You wait a moment and watch. As people jostle 
around her, salivating at the prospect of a well 
cooked pie, you could try to pinch one. Sliding into 
the crowd, you may make a Sleight of Hand skill roll. 
If you succeed, you manage to sneak away with an 
illicit pie (make a roll as above to determine the 
quality) but if you fail, your larceny is spo8ed. The 
pie seller slaps your hand away and the crowd looks 
at you suspiciously - you must slink away to another 
location. 
● For whatever malicious reason, you have taken a 
dislike to this purveyor of baked meats. Rushing up 
to her, you whack your hand underneath the tray 
sending pies spinning in every direction. A look of 
shock on her face is quickly replaced by tears as she 
scrabbles around picking up the ones that are intact. 
It is time for you to move on, but with a penalty of -1 
to your next etique8e roll as word of your viciousness 
gets around.


--- PAGE 104 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
103
S24 Farmer
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
A brawny farmer has brought his cartload of 
cabbages and turnips to market and is busy trading 
them to hungry peasants. His cart is almost empty of 
vegetables but despite that he seems to be grumbling 
about something and generally a bit upset with the 
world, stamping around in the mud in his thick work 
boots and pushing and slapping at his ass, which 
stands forlornly in the harness. What do you do? 
● Neither cabbages nor turnips are of use to you now. 
Being careful not to catch his eye, you slide past while 
he is distracted and move on to your next encounter. 
● Try to cheer him up with a bit of light conversation 
and stories about your heroism. Make an Etique8e 
roll with a +2 bonus. If you succeed it seems to take 
his mind off his problems and in return he provides 
you with an explanation of the local farming 
conditions and best varieties of turnip and cabbage 
that should be planted. Gain 1 point in Region Lore - 
Plains (you can only gain this benefit once per 
planting season). If you fail he is just annoyed by 
your boasts and waves you off, move on to your next 
encounter. 
● Ask him what the problem is? He quickly tells you 
that his cart has got stuck in the mud and he can’t 
shift it. If you want to help you can make a Strength 
skill roll to help him shift it (if you don’t want to help 
you can make your excuses and leave). If you fail, you 
are embarrassed and must move on to the next 
encounter. if you succeed you shove the cart out of 
the mud and he thanks you with a bag of assorted 
vegetables - gain two meals and you may Call Upon 
the Aid of this NPC once, but only when you are in 
the Marketplace or outside the city walls.
S25 Suffering Penitent
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You were trying to avoid the shuffling chanting figure 
but unfortunately as you pass you catch his eye. 
Stopping in his tracks the man reaches out his hands 
towards you and implores you to abandon your path 
and look to the gods for salvation, lest ye be damned, 
damned!
Now that you are caught by his intense gaze, you can 
get a be8er look. Before you stands an older man with 
a bald head and a scraggly grey beard. He is dressed 
in ta8ered clothing that has been crudely repaired in 
many places. 
Most noticeably he has several large ropes and chains 
tied around his body in ways that look designed to be 
uncomfortable and you can see that the bare skin 
around his neck and chest is chafed and bloody from 
the punishment. He is clearly some kind of religious 
zealot who has taken it upon themselves to purify 
himself through suffering. Perhaps he wants you to 
join him? What do you do?
● Shaking yourself free from his grasping, bony 
hands you stammer something about how much you 
respect all the gods and quickly move on before he 
can grab you again. Carry on forward to your next 
encounter. 
● Filthy Cur! How dare this madman put his hands 
on you - with a snarl you shove him away and let out 
a string of curses. As he falls back he makes a strange 
sign in the air toward you before scu8ling away. Roll 
1d6 - on a roll of a 1 you have angered the gods and 
lose one point of LUCK. On a roll of a 6 you have 
pleased some deity and gain one point of LUCK. 


--- PAGE 105 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
104
● This man is clearly troubled by life and it may help 
him if you at least listen. You find a quiet spot nearby 
and let him explain his message. He rambles on for 
some time, speaking intensely about his grand vision 
of the universe and how best to serve the gods, before 
eventually tiring to the point of near silence. He 
thanks you for listening, then gets up and shuffles off, 
seemingly drained by the effort of talking. The next 
time you visit a Temple, restore one point of LUCK as 
the gods acknowledge your act of charity. However, 
close contact with this man comes with peril. Roll a 
1d6 - on a 1 or 2 you have caught a disease. Roll on 
Table 4.3.2 ‘Diseases’ to see what has befallen you.
 ● Perhaps you can take advantage of this crackpot? 
Pulling him to one side you tell him that you too are 
on a religiously inspired quest and whilst you can’t 
reveal all the details, the gods have asked you to 
gather the faithful to your cause. Will he help? Make 
a Con skill test. If you succeed you may Call Upon the 
Aid of this fellow when you are in the Temple, Slums 
or Graveyard locations - he will fight alongside you 
with wild fervour, adding +1 to his damage rolls if he 
hits with his club. However, if you fail your Con skill 
test he has seen through your lies and shoves you 
away hurling curses and denouncing your lack of 
faith, much to the amusement of those other citizens 
passing by. You lose one point of LUCK.
S26 Group of Noblewomen
(All 3) 
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
7 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
Swishing along in thick skirts of good cloth are three 
young women, cha8ering to one another about 
something that is, judging by their laughter, highly 
amusing. You are so dazzled to see a small island of 
colour and mirth that only a last minute side-step 
stops you from crashing into the middle of the group. 
The women look up, startled by your sudden 
presence and their conversation comes to a halt as 
crashing as the one you just executed. They do not 
seem impressed - what do you do? 
● Offer your profuse apologies and, with a li8le bow, 
move on to your next encounter. 
● Put on your most charming smile, flourish a li8le 
wave of the hand and do your best to strike up a 
conversation. Make an Etique8e roll. If you succeed 
in impressing them, you spend a pleasant hour 
cha8ing about social ma8ers. Make a roll on Table 8.5 
Lust for Power - Rumours & Events. 
● Given the dangers facing you and the city, it’s an 
affront to see such carefree people. Growling, you 
barge through the middle of the group mu8ering 
curses. Make a Con skill roll with a +2 bonus - if you 
succeed one of the women faints and collapses 
dramatically to the floor! Add +1 to your next Con roll 
out of satisfaction. Move on to your next encounter. If 
you fail at the roll they laugh at your surly behaviour 
and you have a penalty of 1 to your next Con roll as 
your ego takes a knock.


--- PAGE 106 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
105
S27 Scavenger
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
2 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Almost blending into the rubbish piled up in the 
corner you spy a shambling figure dressed in rags 
and leather patches, with a woven basket strapped to 
her back. She is poking around with a stick and from 
time to time hooking something up to deposit in her 
stash. Although dirty and unkempt, she has a kind 
face and you wonder what she might have overheard 
in her travels around the city. What do you do? 
● As kind as she may be, that’s not the help you are 
looking for. Move on to your next encounter. 
● Smiling, you go over and strike up a conversation 
about life in the city. Make an Etique8e roll. If you 
succeed, you chat for a while and add +1 to your next 
City Lore roll. If you fail...even this lonely person 
would rather pick through trash than talk to you. 
● This woman could be of use to you. You sound her 
out about some light spying duties - make a Con skill 
roll with a +2 bonus if you are willing to part with one 
of your meals. You can have an additional bonus of +1 
for every 1gp you are willing to offer her. If you 
succeed, she is willing to keep an eye out for you. The 
next time you need to make an Awareness check in 
this city, you can succeed automatically as you have 
been ‘tipped off’. You can’t use that service again 
until you randomly meet another Scavenger. 
● This could be a cunning disguise...avoiding her eye, 
you shimmy over until you are right behind her and 
wrestle the basket off her back to see what she is 
really collecting! Unfortunately, it is mostly junk and 
a tussle ensues before you let her get away - you grab 
one item (make a roll on the Everyday Items treasure 
table) but the embarrassment causes you a -1 penalty 
to your next Leadership skill roll.
S28 Apothecary
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
A middle-aged woman is bustling along with the 
look of someone in the midst of a busy and 
demanding day. A faint clinking noise comes from 
one of the several pouches a8ached to her belt and 
you notice that her clothes are well made and at least 
moderately expensive. She is a few steps past you 
when she turns around and points her finger towards 
your chest saying ‘You there! Are you here with my 
deliveries? I need them urgently.’ What do you do? 
● Mumbling something about ‘heroic deeds’ and ‘end 
of the world’ you move off to your next encounter. 
● Intrigued, you ask her about these deliveries. She is 
annoyed that you are not her courier, but explains 
that she is in need of rare herbs and ingredients. She 
asks you to keep an eye out for rare plants - if you do 
encounter any, you can roll a Healing or Herb Lore 
skill roll and if successful, take a sample that you can 
sell to this apothecary for 5gp each (maximum three 
samples) the next time you meet her. 
● Spying an opportunity you tell her that you have 
her deliveries, but you have put them somewhere 
safe for the moment. Make a Con skill roll - If you 
succeed she pays you 5gp and says she will wait here 
whilst you retrieve them. You must take your illicit 
money and move to a new location. If you fail, she is 
suspicious and refuses to pay up. Your next Con skill 
roll is at -1 as you question your ability to deceive. 
● You politely explain that you are not here with 
deliveries but you might be interested in her services. 
She is willing to listen. You may purchase a healing 
salve for 10gp that will either restore 2 points of 
stamina or cure one disease. It needs to be used when 
fresh (within the next three days).


--- PAGE 107 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
106
S29 Wandering Elf
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
11
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Sword
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
The elven are a reclusive people and whilst not 
unknown they are a rare sight outside of their 
wilderness homes, so you are surprised to spot an elf 
si8ing idly nearby in the shade of a tree. He seems to 
be quite at home and completely unconcerned by the 
bustle and chaos of the everyday human life around 
him. Perhaps it is some sort of meditation technique? 
Intrigued, you walk over and nod a greeting, hoping 
to find out what he is up to. What do you do? 
● On second thoughts, this might be a bad idea. After 
you exchange greetings, you move on to your next 
encounter. 
● Try to strike up a conversation. The elf is a li8le 
wary but still an interesting hero like yourself is 
someone worth swapping stories with. You sit down 
with him and pass an hour or two discussing the state 
of the world. Add +1 to your next Hunting or Forest 
Lore skill roll. By the time you have finished you are 
surprised to see it is near dark and you should find a 
place to rest. 
● The elves are an arrogant lot and you see no reason 
why they should stand aside from the world of 
mortals. Walking over you confront him and demand 
he gives up any information that might help you. 
Make a Con or Leadership skill roll with a penalty of 
-2 unless you are an elf. If successful he offers up 
what he can - gain +1 on your next City Lore skill roll. 
If you fail, he mu8ers something in elvish and strides 
away, quickly fading into the crowd.
Special: If your hero is an Elf, you may choose to 
engage with him in conversation and learn what he 
has 
discovered 
about 
this 
se8lement. 
You 
automatically gain +1 to your next social skill roll in 
this se8lement. The conversation takes several hours.
S30 Nobleman
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
12
Social Rank:  
8
Armour:  
Breastplate 
Weapon:  
Sword
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Accompanied by 4 men-at-arms:
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
8
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapon:  
Sword
 
 
Crossbow (loaded and ready to shoot)
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
A member of the nobility has taken some time away 
from their feasting and councils in order to take a 
jaunt around the city. He is a middle aged man, very 
well dressed in finest cloth lined with fur, riding a 
horse and surrounded by four pugnacious looking 
men-at-arms. He is holding a piece of silken cloth 
over his mouth and nose, presumably to ward off the 
smell and miasma of the less fortunate, some of 
which approach him asking for alms only to be 
shoved away by his guards. It isn’t clear what he is up 
to, other than a spot of sightseeing. What do you do? 
● It’s probably best not to get involved with someone 
powerful. You let him pass and move on to your next 
encounter. 
● Perhaps you could make a useful friend? Stepping 
out, you bow and a8empt to introduce yourself. 
Make an Etique8e roll. If successful, the nobleman 
stops for a while and listens to your tale and promises 
to spread the word of your heroism amongst his 
friends. Gain +1 bonus to your next three Etique8e 
rolls. He also hands you a pouch containing 2d6 gold 
pieces. If you fail the roll, he assumes you are just 
another beggar and his guards shove you away. 


--- PAGE 108 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
107
 ● Perhaps this wealthy man can offer you a job or 
become your patron. You move in front of him and, 
ignoring the crossbows pointed in your direction, 
introduce yourself as an adventurer for hire. You 
must test your LUCK - if you are successful the 
nobleman listens to your story with interest and, after 
some consideration reveals to you the location of a 
Catacomb (encounter M4) within the se8lement 
(drop or roll a dice onto your map to find where the 
entrance is) that has been concerning him. If you are 
willing to clear it out - defeat all the monsters you 
find within - he will send a messenger to find you 
with a purse containing 4d6gp as a reward! If you fail 
the LUCK test he listens to half your tale before 
dismissing you as a charlatan, telling his guards to 
keep an eye on you as they leave.
● It’s grossly unfair that this man should be so 
wealthy whilst others suffer! You step towards him 
and, ignoring the warning stares of the crossbowmen, 
confront him about the state of the city and demand 
to know what he is planning to do. Make a Con roll 
with a -3 penalty. If successful, you actually manage 
to shame him into making a few promises of 
improvements. You may add +1 to your Leadership 
skill, permanently, in this se8lement. If you fail, 
however, the nobleman is upset with your 
haranguing and orders his guards to deal with you. 
They bundle you roughly to the side of the street and 
hold you down until their liege has moved on. Lose 
1d3 points of STAMINA.
S31 Pair of Mummers
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
8
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
In a quiet corner you can see a pair of mummers 
(actors) who are taking a few moments to go over 
their roles. A man and a woman, they are both 
wearing large amounts of make-up and large 
awkwardly balanced wigs sit on their heads. From 
what you can tell the current scene is a very dramatic 
one, on top of which the pair appear to be somewhat 
drunk.
At their feet is a trunk containing a variety of pieces 
of costume clothing and props. They are quite 
absorbed in their rehearsal but there is nothing to 
stop you approaching them should you wish too - 
they don’t look dangerous after all. What do you do? 
● Gossip from the theatre is unlikely to be useful. 
Dismissing them, you move on to your next 
encounter. 
● Stroll up, put on your most charming smile and 
strike up a conversation with them. They are mostly 
interested in two topics: The social life of the city and 
themselves. Still, if you can make an Etique8e check 
you can steer the discussion a li8le. Gain a +1 on your 
next social skill roll and roll on the Rumours & Events 
table. If you fail, they mock you mercilessly and your 
confidence takes a knock - your next Leadership roll 
is at -2. 
● Whilst they are absorbed in their practice, try to 
pinch something from their trunk. Make a sleight of 
hand roll. If you succeed, roll once on the Everyday 
Items treasure table. If you fail, they spot your 
larceny and start a hue and cry which is bound to 
a8ract the Watch soon. Give them a smug leer and 
move to another location. 


--- PAGE 109 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
108
● They aren’t doing anything useful or important, so 
you try to recruit them. Make a Leadership skill roll. 
Success means you may Call Upon their Aid. In one 
future encounter.  They will either arrive and pretend 
to be skilled swordsmen, distracting your opponent 
and causing them a -2 penalty, or they can help you 
out in a Social encounter, pretending to be your 
sidekicks and adding +2 to your social skill rolls. You 
can only do this in the Inn, Tavern, Drinking Den or 
Theatre locations. 
● Ask them for some tips and tricks on the fine art of 
acting; For a small fee - 5gp - they will spend an hour  
or so with you showing you a bit of their skills and 
teaching you a few tricks. You can add +2 to your next 
Disguise or Con skill tests.
S32 Fur Trader
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Shortbow, Axe
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
A hunter has come to town to sell his haul of furs. 
Next to him he has a wooden rack covered in pelts 
and furs of a number of creatures, all cleaned and 
ready for working into clothing or some other 
household use. The hunter is a rough looking man, 
not young, with the hard face of someone who has 
spent many days and nights in the wilderness. Dark 
eyes look out from under the brim of foxtail hat and 
his long beard is braided into a plait which blends 
into his bear hide poncho. It is clear that he is a skilled 
trapper, but what does he know of the city? What do 
you do? 
● You feel it is unlikely that he can help you, so with 
a curt nod you move on to your next encounter. 
● Trade with him: He is not interested in buying 
anything, but you can purchase fur and hide clothing 
as listed on the equipment list in the Advanced 
Fighting Fantasy rulebook. Remember to make your 
Bargain roll. 
● Feigning an interest in his wares, you strike up a 
conversation to see if he knows anything that can 
help you. Make an Etique8e roll. If you succeed he 
shares some information about things he has noticed 
in the city and you gain +2 on your next Hunting or 
Animal Lore roll. If you fail he grumpily ignores you 
until you give up and go away. 
● Wait until he is distracted with a customer and try 
to steal something from his rack. Make a Sleight of 
hand roll to see if you manage to purloin something. 
If you succeed you get a fox fur worth 2d6gp. If you 
fail, he notices you and a8acks! You must fight him or 
retreat. Fighting him is still considered an Unlawful 
Action, since you were trying to steal his goods!


--- PAGE 110 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
109
S33 Artisan
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
6 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Hammer
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
A sturdy looking middle aged woman dressed in 
practical work clothes and a leather apron is seated 
on a nearby bench whilst using a couple of small tools 
to work a design onto a wooden block. You watch her 
for a moment; she is intent on her work, making 
careful incisions on the piece with a small chisel and 
hammer, occasionally changing to a different tool 
which she pulls from the large pockets on her apron. 
It is clear that she is a skilled crafter and you suspect 
from the quality of her apparel that she is well paid 
for her work. What do you do? 
● Maybe when you are a famous hero, you will let her 
make a woodcut of your exploits, but for now you 
leave her be and move on to your next encounter. 
● A craftswoman such as this must know a lot about 
the city; you try to strike up a conversation with the 
hope of discovering something useful. Make an 
Etique8e roll. If you succeed she is happy to chat with 
you about her work and you gain +1 to your next 
Bargain and City Lore rolls. If you fail the roll, she is 
too absorbed in her work to talk. 
● You don’t have time to be nice. You reach down and 
snatch the woodwork out of her hands, then demand 
she helps you on your quest if she wants her piece 
back. Make a Con roll. If successful, she cowers and 
agrees to help you - gain +1 on your next City Lore 
roll. If you fail, she stands up and starts loudly 
haranguing you for your rudeness, quickly a8racting 
a crowd of onlookers. You realise it is time to move on 
to your next encounter. Your next Bargain roll has a 
-1 penalty as word of your rudeness spreads around.
S34 Knight-Errant
SKILL   
8
STAMINA  
14
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
Breastplate, Large Shield 
Weapon:  
Sword
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Your eye is drawn to a heavily armed and armoured 
man who is si8ing working on the edge of his sword 
with a whetstone. Judging by his demeanour and the 
crest on his shield, which is resting at the back of his 
seat, you guess that he is a knight-errant - a capable 
fighter that moves from lord to lord seeking out 
opportunities to prove their valour according to the 
knightly code. From the look of him, you think that 
he might be from Gallantaria. Even though he is 
wearing armour and a heavy travel worn cloak, you 
can tell that he is a powerful warrior and could be 
either a useful ally or a dangerous foe. What do you 
do? 
● Knights and their codes of behaviour are 
troublesome. Avoiding his a8ention, move on to your 
next encounter. 
● Maybe you could recruit him? Approaching the 
knight, you introduce yourself and explain your 
mission. Make an Etique8e or Leadership roll with a 
-3 penalty. If successful, he is impressed with your 
bravery and agrees to Come to Your Aid - you may 
call upon him once in this se8lement, he will appear 
and fight alongside you for one combat. If you fail the 
roll, he listens politely but deems your exploits to be 
unworthy. 
● Knight or not, you’re going to knock the polish off 
his armour. You march up to him and demand 
satisfaction - he is shocked, but after a moment agrees 
to fight you, provided there are some rules. You will 
fight for five rounds of melee combat, whoever wins 
the most rounds is the victor. You may submit at any 
point (though he will not unless reduced to 3 
STAMINA or less). If you should defeat the knight, he 


--- PAGE 111 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
110
grudgingly hands you a purse of 10 gold pieces as 
your prize. If you lose, he lectures you at some length 
about pride and its dangers and your next 
Leadership skill roll is at -2. If you don’t like his rules 
you can either a8ack him anyway (this will be an 
Unlawful Action) or sneer at him and move on to 
your next encounter. 
 ● A warrior such as this must have some wisdom or 
tips that they could pass on, perhaps you can 
convince them to provide you with a quick training 
session? After introducing yourself and explaining 
your request the knight tells you that his services 
come with a price - test your Bargain skill if you are 
willing to pay the 2d6gp he is charging. If you fail the 
test your offer is too low and he grumpily requests 
that you move on. If you succeed the knight-errant 
takes your coin, agrees to spar with you and try to 
correct the flaws in your technique. Sparring takes 
several hours, so make sure you have the time to 
spare before you start. At the end of this class you feel 
you have sharpened your wits and loosened your 
arm, you have +1 to your combat rolls and damage 
rolls until the end of the next day. You may request 
this service if you meet the knight again, but only 
once per week.
● A knight from the Old World must have travelled 
far and wide and learnt a great deal. You resolve to sit 
with him and make conversation - make an Etique8e 
skill roll. If you succeed you can spend a few hours 
swapping tales - increase your World Lore skill by 
one permanently (this can only happen on your first 
meeting with the Knight, on subsequent meetings 
gain a temporary +1 bonus to World Lore). If you fail 
the Etique8e roll, he politely declines to spend time 
with you and asks you to move on.
S35 Night Watchman
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
3
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Quarterstaff
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Shuffling along with a wary step comes an old man, 
his beard as white as moonlight, dressed in several 
layers to keep out the cold and carrying a lantern 
topped staff in one hand and a bell in the other. As his 
light illuminates you, he stops and peers out from 
under the brim of his wide brimmed hat. ‘Who goes 
there?’ comes the query. The night watchman stands 
and waits for your reply, ready to ring his bell in 
alarm if needed. What do you do? 
● Hold up your hand in greeting and reply ‘just a 
traveller, coming home late’ before moving on. 
● Stand stock still and glare at him - make a Con skill 
roll. If you succeed, the old man quails and backs 
away, leaving you alone in the darkness. If you fail, 
he stands his ground and starts ringing his alarm bell 
- you must move to a new location immediately or 
roll on the Lawbreaker table. 
● Greet him and, showing you mean no harm, go 
over and talk. He is more than happy to pass some 
time in conversation - it is preferable to patrolling the 
dangerous streets. Make an Etique8e skill roll. If you 
succeed you learn a few things and gain +1 on your 
next City Lore roll, if you fail you learn nothing and 
when you stop cha8ing, you realise that you have 
wandered away to a new location. Pick one that is 
adjacent to where you started. 
● The job of night watch is poorly paid and risky - 
offer him 10gp and make a Con or Leadership skill 
roll. If successful, you can Call upon the Aid of this 
fellow, who will fight alongside you - but only for 
encounters at night. If you fail the roll, he takes the 
gold but makes no promises...


--- PAGE 112 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
111
S36 Tithe Collector
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
10
Social Rank:  
5
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Much to your dismay, you have caught the eye of a 
tithe collector, sent out on the official business of 
ge8ing revenue for his lord or lady. This rotund 
middle aged man, dressed in good cloth as fits his 
station, carries with them a large book detailing the 
expected rates and payments along with a carved 
wooden seal which grants them the authority to 
charge a levy as they decide. You let out a sigh, 
because you know that once you have been entered 
into the lists by the collector they will seek you out 
again in the future. In the meantime it is likely they 
will charge you. Already, you can see the tithe 
collector is leafing through their book, no doubt 
trying to work out how much should be charged on a 
‘hero’. What do you do? 
● Quickly, you try to dash away before they can latch 
onto you. Make a test against your Sneaking skill. If 
successful you manage to slip away unnoticed, but if 
you fail, the tithe collector intercepts you; add +1 to 
your roll on the table below. 
● Try and talk your way out of it. Make a test against 
your Con or Law skill. If you succeed you convince 
the Tithe Collector that you’ve already paid your 
dues for this season. If you fail, he is upset by your 
blustering and increases your charge - add +1 to your 
roll on the tithing table below. 
● Accept your fate and make the payment as 
required. It’s painful, but the alternative is being 
thrown out of the se8lement, so you grit your teeth 
and put up with it.
1d6 
Tithe
1 
The collector has mistaken you for somebody 
 
else, probably a peasant or labourer. You  
 
might be upset by this but on the other hand, 
 
it means he thinks you have already paid your 
due and leaves you alone - this time.
2 
The man flicks through his lists, struggling to 
 
find a suitable reason for taking your money.  
 
In the end, he se8les on a charge of one gold  
 
piece, but with the promise that he’ll  
 
 
definitely expect more from you next time.
3 
There is a bit of a discussion about what you  
 
should be taxed as and in the end you manage 
to convince him that you are basically a  
 
 
servant and really aren’t worth that much.   
 
Your charge is a relatively minor 1d6 gp.
4 
Waving his seal under your nose and  
 
 
generally making it clear that you are beneath 
him, the Collector eventually decides that   
 
being a sell-sword makes you a type of  
 
 
merchant and charges you 2d6 gold pieces.
5 
The tithes have been poor this year and the   
 
Collector is looking to make up some of the   
 
shortfall. With a nasty smile on his face, he   
 
levies you for 4d6 gold pieces.
6 
Perhaps the Collector was beaten up by an   
 
adventurer recently, because he seems to find 
 
all sorts of reasons to levy you - sword tax,   
 
armour tax, boots tax and so on - it all adds up 
to a charge of 8d6 gold pieces! It’s a shocking  
 
fee, but what choice do you have?
Special: A8acking the Tithe Collector is considered to 
be an extremely serious offence. If you do take this 
choice, you must apply a -3 penalty to your roll on the 
Lawbreaker table, which must be done immediately, 
as the Watch keeps a careful eye on him.
Special: If all else fails, you may test your LUCK to 
avoid the tithe. If you succeed, a messenger runs up 
and he is called away immediately, but if you fail the 
LUCK test you roll again on the tithe table adding +1 
to the result. Double taxed!


--- PAGE 113 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
112
S37 Friar
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
10
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Quarterstaff
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
In addition, if you do a8ack this devoted follower of 
Galana, then 3 Lea]easts - see encounter C22 -  will 
spring up from the ground to defend him!
A merry friar has come into town, on business for his 
monastery. He is dressed in the robes of his order - 
the varied greens of Galana -  and a long travelling 
cloak, with leather sandals on his feet and a stout 
walking stick in hand. He has a well worn knapsack 
on a strap over one shoulder and on the other side, he 
has an unusual leather harness containing a small oak 
barrel, from which he is dispensing samples of the 
monks’ work. A strong whiff of liquor wafting 
around here tells you that it is some sort of brandy or 
spirit that he is selling. Free alcohol is, naturally, 
a8racting a small crowd of interested peasants and 
judging by the loudness of the conversation the friar 
has also been sampling his own supply. What do you 
do? 
● It looks like fun, but you don’t have time for it at the 
moment. Move on to your next encounter. 
● You’ve earned a break. You join the throng and take 
a cup of the brandy. It is delicious but extremely 
strong. You can restore one point of LUCK as your 
spirits rise, but suffer -1 point of SKILL until you have 
a chance to sleep off the effects. The talk flows freely 
in this merry li8le crowd and you should roll once on 
Table 8.7 Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & Events to find 
out what you hear. 
● You join in with the crowd but politely decline a 
sample of the drink. Instead you take the opportunity 
to quiz the friar, though he is mostly interested in the 
gods. Gain +1 on your next Religion Lore roll. 
● Waiting for your opportunity, you ask the friar if he 
is capable of healing your wounds. Make an Etique8e 
skill roll with a +3 bonus; if successful he is happy to 
spend a li8le time bandaging you up (you may 
recover 3 points of STAMINA). If you fail the roll he 
is a bit upset at your interruption and asks you to go 
to a temple instead. A Priest of Galana automatically 
succeeds at this roll.
● You decide to have a bit of fun with this crowd; 
pu8ing on your most menacing air, you start barging 
your way into them, knocking drinks out of their 
hands and shoving people around. You make it clear 
to the friar he will need to give you something to get 
rid of you. Make a Con skill roll. If you succeed he 
gives you a small bo8le of fine brandy (worth 15gp) 
in return for you leaving. If you fail the roll - the 
crowd turns on you and starts pelting you. Take one 
point of STAMINA damage and move on to your next 
location before weapons are drawn.


--- PAGE 114 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
113
S38 Witchsniffer
SKILL   
8
STAMINA  
13
Social Rank:  
7
Armour:  
Chain Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Sword
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
With his wide-brimmed hat and silver bu8oned 
longcoat of thick black leather, the Witchsniffer is an 
immediately recognisable figure. Working his way 
through the crowds, this tall man is as alert as a hawk. 
His dark eyes dart from person to person, pausing 
only long enough to scan them for signs of heresy and 
chaos. 
His gaze alights on you and he stops, evidently 
intrigued by the possibilities for questioning that you 
present. You note that as he is considering you his 
hand has moved to the pommel of his sword. What 
do you do? 
● If you have unveiled the nature of the Hag (see 
encounter S9) you can provide that information to the 
Witchsniffer and they will allow you to move on 
unmolested. 
● Nod respectfully to him and try to slip back into the 
crowd. Make a Sneaking skill test - if you succeed you 
have evaded him and can move onto the next 
encounter. If you fail the test he has kept an eye on 
you and you will be questioned as described below. 
● Take the initiative - moving over to him you confide 
that you have seen suspicious activity nearby that he 
should investigate - make a Con skill roll - if you 
succeed he is convinced and hurries away. If you fail 
the roll, he will question you as described below. 
● Stand defiantly and wait for him to make his move 
- the Witchsniffer shoves his way over and starts to 
question you. If your MAGIC score is zero, he will 
ask three questions. If you have a MAGIC score of 
one or more he senses your aura of power and will 
ask five questions. For each question you must test 
one of Etique8e, Religion Lore or Magic Lore (your 
choice). For each time you fail he will fine you 1d6 
gold pieces for your lack of faith! If you refuse to pay 
(or answer) he will call for The Watch to deal with 
you and you must roll on the Lawbreaker table!
Special: If you are currently engaged in fighting The 
Coven, you can explain your situation to the 
Witchsniffer and he will be keen to help you. He will 
provide you with a charm (a small pouch of herbs 
and bones) that fills you with determination and 
increases your SKILL or MAGIC (you choose) by one 
when fighting witches. After giving you this help and 
some advice, he pats you on the back and wishes you 
the best of luck - indeed you may restore one point of 
LUCK.


--- PAGE 115 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
114
S39 Messenger
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
Dodge Skill 3 
Weapon:  
Improvised
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Si8ing on a barrel at the side of a street is a girl, idly 
drumming her heels on the staves and looking 
around. When she sees you she hops off the barrel 
and comes tro8ing over with a determined look on 
her face. ‘Hey you, hero - need to find someone? I can 
help!’. 
The girl explains that she is available for hire as a 
messenger and she is adept at finding people around 
the city, for a fee of course. What do you do? 
● Confident you can find anyone you need for 
yourself, you shoo her away and move on to your 
next encounter. 
● Ask her to find someone: For a fee of 1gp, she will 
go to a location of your choosing and find the person 
you are seeking. When you get to that location you 
can choose one of the social encounters from the list 
of those available. You can use this service once per 
day. 
● Ask her to deliver a message: For a fee of 1gp she 
will take a message from you and deliver it to any 
NPC - as listed in the social encounters -  in the city 
(this may help you complete your missions quickly). 
You can use this service once per day.
S40 Children
(1d6+1 Children)
SKILL   
3
STAMINA  
3
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Unarmed
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action and 
indeed it is considered so heinous that a -6 penalty on 
the Lawbreaker table applies.
You see children everywhere in the city, playing, 
running errands or helping out their parents at some 
trade or other. Here a group have escaped the 
clutches of the adults and are playing a game of 
‘guards and goblins’ with the two sides pelting and 
taunting each other from either side of the street. 
Usually you would slip past them unnoticed but they 
have taken an interest in you and started asking 
questions about your equipment (‘why'd ya have so 
many weapons?) and what you are up to (why ain’t 
you out farming turnips? Did ya lose your pigs?) so it 
seems you are going to have to do or say something 
to get past. 
● Nodding and scowling you (gently) shove your 
way past the juvenile inquisition and head on to your 
next 
encounter. 
You 
can 
hear 
sounds 
of 
disappointment as you leave. 
● The safety of the city (and perhaps the world?) 
might rest on your shoulders but hey, you have time 
to play. You join in with the games for a while and 
relax. Make an Etique8e skill test with a +3 bonus. If 
you succeed you pick up some news about the 
se8lement, roll on Table 8.7 Trivia & Gossip - 
Rumours & Events. If you fail, you had a nice time 
but eventually the children get bored of you. 
● Curs! Rascals! With a flash of anger you growl and 
roar at the children  - shocked faces look up for a 
moment before they sca8er. Gain +1 to your next Con 
roll, but also roll a 1d6. On a roll of 1 the gods have 
noticed your cruelty and you lose one point of LUCK.


--- PAGE 116 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
115
S41 Beggar
SKILL   
3
STAMINA  
5
Social Rank:  
2 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Unarmed
A8acking this person is not an Unlawful Action.
A head covered in filthy ma8ed hair, crawling in lice, 
holds a face which is pox-scarred and weatherbeaten. 
Filthy rags cover the man’s painfully thin body and 
limbs as he holds out a wooden bowl towards you. 
‘Alms for the poor?’ he asks in a voice that has been 
ravaged by too many icy cold winter nights spent 
sleeping in the rough. Whatever he once was, this 
beggar is now amongst the lowest of the low. What 
do you do? 
● Holding your cape over your face to avoid 
infection, you step smartly around him and move on. 
● Pity tugs your heartstrings: Reaching into your 
purse you drop 1 gold piece into his bowl - the beggar 
is overjoyed and thanks you profusely, to the point of 
embarrassment as a small crowd has noticed your 
generosity. Add +1 to your next Leadership roll. 
● What is worth more than gold? A bit of kindness, 
you believe. You stop and talk to the man, offering 
him what comfort you can before you move on. Roll 
1d6 - on a roll of 1 you have caught something from 
him and must roll on ‘Table 4.3.2 Diseases’. On a roll 
of 6 the gods have noticed your efforts and favoured 
you; restore one point of LUCK. 
● Ask him if he wants a job: Make a Bargain or Con 
roll with a +2 bonus. If you succeed you Call Upon 
the Aid of this beggar when in the Slum Street, 
Graveyard, Garbage Heap, Temple or Jail locations 
for a fee of 1 gp. He will hurl himself into combat, 
armed with a club. If you fail the skill test the beggar 
is afraid of you and shuffles away like a beaten dog.
S42 Townsfolk
The random encounter tables for each location are 
tailored to suit them - so you are more likely to 
encounter a priest at the temple than the jail -  but 
there are some townsfolk which are found 
everywhere and there are some times, if you are 
using this book as an aid to running adventures, 
when you might need a random, non-specific citizen. 
Use this table then refer to the specific encounters. If 
you don’t want to add an additional encounter at this 
point, you can ignore the ‘Townsfolk’ encounter and 
simply treat them as background figures, ignored as 
you make your way through the se8lement.
Table 4.2.2 Townsfolk - 
roll on this table then refer to the encounter
2d6 
Daytime 
 
Nigh3ime
2 
C1 Cutpurse  
C16 Cu8hroats
3 
S15 Young Noble 
S27 Scavenger
4-5 
S14 Servant 
 
S14 Servant
6-8 
S18 Peasant 
 
S18 Peasant
9-10 
S40 Children  
S35 Night Watchman
11 
S44 Soldier 
 
S2 Escaped Slave
12 
S41 Beggar 
 
S41 Beggar


--- PAGE 117 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
116
S43 Student
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
8
Social Rank:  
4 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Wandering 
along 
in 
a 
cloud 
of 
frustrated 
concentration, book in hand, you see the robed figure 
of what must be a student. She is obviously making 
an a8empt to absorb her lessons, but you also note 
that her other hand holds a jug of something with a 
distinctly beer-y smell. She is probably a noble of 
some kind - not many peasants can afford to send 
their children to school, let alone college - but it might 
be worth talking to her anyway. What do you do? 
● What could a student teach a master such as 
yourself? Leaving her to her studies, you move on to 
your next encounter. 
● Walk over and introduce yourself. Make an 
Etique8e test - if you fail she excuses herself and 
hurries away, if you succeed she gives you a long talk 
taking at least one hour. Your next Lore roll of any 
kind (except City Lore) gets a +1 bonus. Exhausted 
from nodding your head and listening, you move on. 
● Students have romantic notions which you could 
put to use! Approaching, you explain your mission 
and it’s dangers - make a Leadership skill roll. If you 
succeed you can Call upon the Aid of this student 
once whilst in the College, Hospital, Inn, Tavern or 
Wealthy Streets location. If you fail they are horrified 
back away from you before scrambling away. 
● You’ve never liked bookworms. Striding over you 
knock the book from her hand and try to grab her 
beer - she holds onto that tightly. Make a Con roll. If 
you succeed she shrieks and runs, leaving you with a 
jug of beer and a book worth 1d6gp. If you fail she 
stands her ground and calls for the Watch - you 
should move on immediately, or stay and roll on the 
Lawbreaker table if you really want to.
S44 Soldier
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
11
Social Rank:  
3
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk and Small Shield
Weapon:  
Spear
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
It is clear that the man standing nearby is a soldier or 
mercenary. His ba8ered face and muscular build 
would have been clue enough without the arms and 
armour he wears like a second skin. He is brooding 
over a jug of ale with a sour look on his face and 
hasn’t noticed you, so you take a moment to study 
him. You can see that he has well worn leather 
armour and a spear with a brightly polished tip. His 
boots are large and stout, his tunic and hose seem to 
be in good condition. In short, this is someone who is 
ready for duty. What do you do? 
● He doesn’t seem to want company and you are 
happy to oblige him. Move on to your next encounter. 
● Saunter over and introduce yourself, in the hope of 
exchanging war stories for a while. Make an Etique8e 
roll - if you succeed you can spend a while discussing 
ba8les and combat, as a result of which you gain +1 
on your Combat skills for the next fight you are in, 
trying to put into practice the tips you’ve picked up 
from him. If you fail, he makes a crude joke at your 
expense and you retreat, embarrassed - your next 
Con roll is at -1 due to this humbling. 
● You cough loudly and raise two fingers at him in 
the universal sign of challenge. Make a test against 
your Con skill. If you succeed you have taunted him 
into a8acking you, and you can fight without rolling 
on the Lawbreaker table. If you fail the test he simply 
sneers at you and goes back to his drinking. 
● Offer him 1gp to give you directions to either an 
Armourer or Weaponsmith - the next time you are in 
a location which has one of these as a possible map 
encounter, you may automatically choose to find it.


--- PAGE 118 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
117
S45 Con Artist
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
5
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You are approached by a neatly dressed and groomed 
figure, a man who extends his hand to you in greeting 
and starts to ask you questions about your life and 
exploits. He is talking fast and with a certain charm 
and wit. They seem to know that you are an 
adventurer and are fascinated by your heroic travels, 
though you are not sure why. What do you do? 
● You don’t trust this person so you are going to 
brush them off and move on. 
● You decide to engage them in a game of wits. Make 
a contested skill roll using either Etique8e or Con 
skills against their SKILL of 6. If you win, you 
convince them to help you out for the rest of the day 
- they will not fight for you but help you with social 
situations, providing +1 to Etique8e, Con or Bargain 
rolls. If you lose, they have talked you out of 3d6gp. 
How did that happen? 
● Clearly this is some sort of ne’er do well, intent on 
causing you problems - you grab them and shake 
them vigorously to get your message across. Make a 
test against your Strength skill - if you succeed they 
are suitably frightened and flee, dropping 1d6gp in 
their panic. If you fail they wriggle out of your grasp 
and dance away, jeering. Your next Con roll is at -1 
due to embarrassment.
● Something tells you The Watch might be interested 
in this fellow - you take careful note of his 
appearance. The next time you meet a member of The 
Watch or find yourself in the Jail or City Gate 
locations you can try and report him - make a test of 
your Law skill. If you succeed, The Watch gives you 
a reward of 1gp for the information, if you fail the test 
they have no idea who you are talking about.
S46 Dying Man
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
0
Social Rank:  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
Coughing and splu8ering their last, you have come 
across a victim of the type of violence that is all too 
common in the city. It is clear that without assistance 
this person will soon be going to meet their maker. 
What do you do? 
● You don’t know why they’ve ended up this way 
and you don’t want to find out. Averting your eyes, 
you move on. 
● This poor wretch needs your help, urgently. You 
can use either the Healing skill or, if you have it, 
magical healing to aid them. If you use the Healing 
skill you must pass a skill test to have an effect. If 
your healing is successful, you staunch their wounds 
and bring them back to consciousness. You may also 
move them to a Temple or Hospital location and pay 
5gp to the priests to save them if you have no trust in 
your own healing skills. If you should save them, 
they are too weak to do much more than thankyou for 
your help but promise to remember you. If you 
should die in this se8lement, roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 
your new friend happens to be passing by and will 
return the favour by pulling you to safety! You will 
wake up at one of the Temple locations, with all your 
gear and one point of STAMINA. The life-debt is 
repaid.
● Life has no mercy for the weak. You quickly frisk 
them for valuables as they clutch at you feebly - roll 
1d6: 1-3: Nothing, 4-5: A pouch containing 1d6gp, 6: 
You are spo8ed and a hue and cry is raised - you must 
roll on the table 4.1.30 ‘Lawbreaker Table’.


--- PAGE 119 ---

Table 4.3.1 Se=lement Challenge Encounters
C1 
Cutpurse
C2  
Falling Masonry
C3 
Falling Nightsoil
C4 
Funeral Cortege
C5 
Archery Contest
C6 
Black Powder Explosion
C7 
Una8ended Stall
C8 
Ghoul
C9 
Giant Rat
C10 
Goblin Infiltrator
C11 
Burning House
C12 
Mass Brawl
C13 
Hobgoblin Spy
C14 
Runaway Horse
C15 
Wrestling Contest
C16 
Cu8hroats
C17 
Ratman
C18 
Fire Sprite Arsonist
C19 
Ravenous Slime
C20 
Giant Spider
C21 
Troglodytes
C22 
Leaf Beast
C23 
Slave Takers
C24 
Grannits
C25 
Skeleton
C26 
Orc Raider
C27 
Swarm of Rats
C28 
Monstrous Fly
C29 
Chaos Horror
C30 
Tomb Mist
AFF Adventure Creation System
118
4.3 Se=lement Challenge Encounters
In this section are the ‘challenge encounters’, so called 
because they involve some level of danger to your 
hero, although some can be avoided by use of social 
or movement based skills. 
Heroes should consider how long it takes to complete 
an encounter - if you are in hot pursuit of a villain, 
you may not have time to a8end an Archery Contest.
Temporary skill bonuses and penalties: Some of these 
encounters give you an opportunity to gain a bonus 
to a future skill use, though often at the risk of 
suffering a penalty. Such bonuses and penalties last 
until you use them (usually by making a skill test) or 
leave that se8lement for a day or more. Remember 
that if you want to retire to an inn or drinking den to 
‘wait it out’, you have to pay the cost of food and 
lodging.


--- PAGE 120 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
119
Standard Encounter Options
As a reminder, in Chapter 3 we detailed a number of 
encounter options. A hero may wish to use this (or 
others they can think of) to deal with the challenges 
they face.
Table 3.1.1 Standard Encounter Options - 
see descriptions in Chapter 3 for more details.
Option  
Action
Fight  
Begin combat and resolve it using the  
 
 
normal combat rules, you may use a  
 
 
ranged weapon or spell in the first   
 
 
round if you have spo8ed your target.
Flee 
 
Run from combat; test your LUCK to  
 
 
escape or suffer a ‘free hit’.
Sneak  
A8empt to use Sneaking to get past   
 
 
your target, consider what bonuses or 
 
 
penalties apply.
Talk 
 
Use a social skill, you must share a   
 
 
means of communication with your   
 
 
target.
Trick  
A8empt to trick your target in some   
 
 
way, a variety of means including  
 
 
 
magic can be used.
Bribe  
Offer your target an amount of gold to 
ignore your actions.
Feed 
 
Offer an animal food in order to  
 
 
 
distract it.
C1 Cutpurse
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
1 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is not an Unlawful Action.
Make a test against your Awareness Special Skill with 
-3 penalty. If you fail, a skilled cutpurse has relieved 
you of 2d6 gold pieces. Deduct them from your total 
and with a heavy sigh, move on with your adventure. 
If you succeed, you have noticed the a8empt and 
must decide what to do. 
● Slap her hand away and tell her to stop bothering 
you. The next time you encounter a cutpurse you 
may ignore it, as she recognises you. Move on to your 
next encounter. 
● You notice the hand working a blade towards your 
coin pouch, and with a swift movement you a8empt 
to grab and twist the wrist. Make a SKILL test. If you 
succeed, you have caught this thief and can hold onto 
her for long enough to a8ract the notice of a 
Watchman. Hand her over to receive a bounty of 1d6 
gold pieces. If you don’t like doing the dirty work for 
the Watch, you may fight her. This is not an Unlawful 
Action. 
● You spin about and growl in the face of this thief. 
Make a Leadership special skill test. If you succeed 
she cowers before you and you may question her 
about this location. Add +2 to your next City Lore or 
Secret Signs test. If you fail, she is startled but not 
intimidated and will flee.


--- PAGE 121 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
120
C2 Falling Masonry
You are walking along minding your own business 
and trying to work out where to go next when you 
hear a creak and a snap from above you - a part of the 
building you are passing has broken off and bricks 
and tiles are plummeting toward you!
Make a LUCK test (or test your skill to Dodge). If you 
succeed you manage to dive out of the way. You may 
continue on your way.
If you fail, you are caught by the falling debris and 
suffer 1d3 points of damage. Cursing your ill fortune, 
there is nothing to do but dust yourself down and 
continue your travels.
C3 Falling Nightsoil
Passing along a narrow street lost in your own 
thoughts you hear a shout of ‘mind out below!’ as the 
contents of someone's bedpan are tossed out of a 
window above you! You have only a moment to dive 
out of the way and avoid the stinking slurry.
Make a LUCK test (or you may test against your 
SKILL, using the Dodge special skill if you have it). If 
you succeed you manage to sidestep the spla8er and 
after aiming a few curses upwards, you may continue 
with your adventure.   If you fail you are drenched in 
waste. For a moment you stand stock still, 
contemplating the disaster. What do you do? 
● Accept your fate and march on. Due to the stench 
you will be at -3 to all Social Skill tests until you have 
a chance to clean yourself (at an inn or river). 
● Vengeance! Drawing your weapon you smash 
through the door of the offending house and rush 
upstairs, where you apply a hefty beating to the poor 
fellow that drenched you. He begs your forgiveness 
and helps clean off the muck, but your violence has 
been noticed by the locals who have called the Watch, 
and you must roll on the Lawbreaker table, with a 
minimum result of 6.
C4 Funeral Cortege
Carrying a coffin draped in dark cloth, a group of 
mourners are making their way down the street. They 
are dressed mostly in black with hoods obscuring 
their faces. 
Four men carry the casket, trudging their footsteps 
through the filthy mud of this alleyway. At the head 
of the procession a tall woman carries a large gong 
with which she is beating out the slow rhythm of 
their march and next to her a short but very rotund 
man is waving an incense burner and chanting a 
dirge. 
They take up most of the narrow street. You stop, 
thinking to pay your respects as they pass. What do 
you do? 
● Bow your head and offer up a prayer as they pass. 
Make a LUCK roll. If you fail the procession stops as 
it reaches you and the coffin is opened, revealing it to 
be empty -  these are not mourners, they are actually 
cultists looking for a victim to fill it! Fight them to 
survive. If you pass the LUCK test, the cortege slowly 
moves by. 
● Something about this bothers you. Make an 
Awareness SKILL roll - if successful you spot the 
bulges of concealed weapons under their robes and 
recognise the chants as those of a foul death cult...you 
have just enough time to slip away down a side alley 
before these cultists reach you. If you fail the roll, 
make a LUCK roll as above to see if they wish to grab 
you! 
● You’ve no time for this sentimentality. You barge 
forward, secretly hoping that they drop the coffin as 
you jostle them. Moments later you realise your 
mistake as the Cultists a8ack you - they want you in 
that coffin! Make a test of your Strength skill - if you 
succeed, you have scared the cultists with your 
belligerence and fight with a +2 bonus.


--- PAGE 122 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
121
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
2 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking these people is not an Unlawful Action.
 There are 6 cultists that must be fought off, they will 
fight to the last. You must fight them three at a time. 
They wield clubs as weapons (concealed in their 
loose robes) and they have no armour.  
If you wish to avoid fighting them, you can a8empt 
to make a Con roll with a -3 penalty to convince them 
that you are another member of the same cult, just 
checking up on them. If the a8empt fails, it’s time to 
fight.
If you survive this fight you may loot a pack of 
incense, an incense burner and a bronze gong should 
you wish to take them. They can be sold for 20gp or 
kept (they take up one encumbrance slot).
C5 Archery Contest
An archery contest is being held! A local lord wants 
to call on the support of his archers and to make sure 
that the peasants are training as the law requires. 
All may enter for a fee of 3gp and try to win a prize. 
Each archer is given 10 shots to prove their worth. 
For each shot, make a combat roll (2d6 + your skill) 
and compare it to the following target numbers to see 
where you hit: 
● Bullseye (12 points) - 22
● Yellow Rings (8 points) - 18
● Red Rings (6 points)  - 15
● Blue Rings (3 points) - 13. 
Tally up the points you score with 10 shots 
(ammunition is provided). The prizes awarded are: 
● 100 points or over - tournament winner, 100gp and 
+1 on Etique8e and Leadership skill roles in this 
se8lement due to your fame for a week. 
● 80-99 points - a 25gp purse and much admiration 
from the crowd. 
● 50-79 points - a 5gp purse and thanks for 
participating. 
● Below 49 points - the mockery of your fellow 
competitors. Take a -2 penalty the next time you use 
a bow, due to your shaky confidence.
Participating in the competition can be assumed to 
take up most of the day.


--- PAGE 123 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
122
C6 Black Powder explosion.
Ahead of you, you see a dwarven sapper is pulling a 
cart of barrels across an intersection. He loses his 
footing on some stones we8ed by last night's rain, 
slips and pulls the cart over. Before you can react, one 
of the barrels bounces free of the cart, spins across the 
slick cobbles before popping open and spilling its 
contents of black powder straight onto a small stove 
a footman is using to brew up his drink! There is a 
bone shuddering explosion! Roll against Dodge to 
dive out of the way. If successful you hurl yourself 
through a doorway and onto the floor of a hovel, 
avoiding damage. If unsuccessful you take 1d6+2 
points of damage, plus the heat of the explosion 
knocks your boots and hat off, and singes away your 
hair, eyebrows and beard (if any). Deduct one from 
your next 3 social skill rolls as you get used to it and 
-3 to Disguise skill rolls for a week as it grows back.   
Either way you are deafened for one day, deduct 2 
from your Awareness skill tests until tomorrow.
As you look around the aftermath you see the 
explosion has sca8ered the other barrels of powder 
around, knocked the sapper over, sent the footman 
flying along the alley and started several small fires. 
How do you react? 
● The job of the hero is to help others. You start 
pu8ing out fires and a8end to the footman, who is 
injured. Make a Healing roll. If successful you bring 
him round. He tells you his name is Rodni of Skoom, 
halberdier. You may call upon his aid once. He has 
SKILL 7 STAMINA 8 and wields a halberd. 
● As your head clears you realise what a mess this 
place is, which is just a distraction from your mission. 
Pulling yourself to your feet you move on. 
●In the aftermath, you notice that no one is paying 
a8ention to the black powder. Although you have 
heard it is a dangerous secret, you decide to steal a 
keg. Make a Sleight of Hand roll. If you fail you must 
roll on the Lawbreaker table. The keg can be sold for 
75gp or it contains thirty ‘charges’ of black powder.
C7 Una=ended stall
Passing along a quiet street you notice a small stall 
selling a variety of interesting looking bric-a-brac. As 
you approach to see if there is anything of use to be 
had you realise that the stall is una8ended and that 
there does not appear to be anyone around paying 
a8ention.   
What do you do? 
● Have a quick look at the stall and snaffle one item 
before hurrying away. You may choose either a small 
bronze ke8le suitable for brewing up a warming 
drink (worth 3gp), a cloak clasp fashioned from 
copper in the shape of an oak leaf (worth 1gp) or an 
iron rod, about 4 inches in length and covered in 
strange runes (worth 5gp). Sniggering to yourself you 
make your escape. 
● Wait patiently until the stallholder appears and 
make sure no one else takes your advantage of the 
situation. After a few minutes an old tinker appears 
and thanks you for waiting. You may purchase any of 
the items noted above for 1g or continue with your 
travels. If you make a purchase, she chats to you 
about the area and you may re-roll the encounter for 
your next location. 
● Using your Bargain or Evaluate skill you spend a 
few minutes carefully sifting through the items on 
sale. If you make a successful skill test you notice a 
pewter tankard that was made by a famous 
craftsman. When the tinker re-appears you may 
purchase it for 1g, it may be sold to another merchant 
for 20g! Add +1 to your LUCK score.


--- PAGE 124 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
123
C8 Ghoul
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Small Claw
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Special:  
If the Ghoul hits you four times, you  
 
 
will become paralysed and unable to  
 
 
defend yourself!
You notice a lurching figure dressed in ta8ered rags.
Initially, you think it to be some poor leper or other 
unfortunate that you may be able to help in some 
way, until it turns toward you showing a face of 
ro8ing flesh and exposed bone! Gasping in horror 
you realise this must be a ghoul, escaped from its 
crypt and hungry for flesh! At this moment it is 
leering at a screaming peasant and looks set to 
devour the poor defenceless wretch. What do you 
do? 
● A terrible thing, to be sure, but not actually your 
problem - you can try and slip away unnoticed. Make 
a Sneaking Special Skill roll. If you succeed you can 
get away in the commotion. If you fail, you still 
escape the ghoul but your cowardice has been 
noticed (and will be widely reported!) and you suffer 
a -2 penalty to your next Leadership skill roll in this 
se8lement. 
● You are a hero and it is time to do your thing. You 
step forward, pu8ing yourself between the ghoul and 
its intended victim. If you succeed in vanquishing it, 
your bravery will be spoken of in the inns and taverns 
of this place. Gain a +2 bonus to your next Leadership 
skill roll in this se8lement.
C9 Giant Rat
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
5
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Small Bite
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Any se8lement will a8ract rats and mice and any 
large se8lement will also gather some of their larger 
more aggressive kin - the Giant Rat. Unfortunately 
for you, you have disturbed one which is now leaping 
out from its hiding place to a8ack! With its vicious 
teeth and claws this pestilent creature needs 
dispatching as soon as possible. Your options are 
simple - kill it or flee.
Note, that should you be bi8en by this mucky 
creature (you take damage from an a8ack) you may 
become infected with a disease. Test your LUCK. If 
you fail, roll on the diseases table (Table 4.3.2 
Diseases) to see what afflicts you.
If you succeed in killing it and you happen to be a 
dwarf, you may make a SKILL (Crafting) test to turn 
the Giant Rat into a dwarven delicacy, rat skewers. If 
you succeed you may gain one rations. For a non-
Dwarf, the SKILL test has a -4 penalty. (Just don’t 
think too carefully about what it was eating before 
you caught up with it).


--- PAGE 125 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
124
Diseases
Unfortunately, the monsters of Titan are a hotbed of 
diseases and some encounters will grant you a chance 
of experiencing one of these for yourself. If you are 
required to do so, refer to the table below to see what 
effect your ailment has.
Diseases take effect from the morning after you 
contract the disease. Refer to the duration given to see 
how many days you have to suffer. Diseases can be 
addressed at the Temple or Hospital locations, for a 
fee. Once you have had a dose of disease, you will be 
immune to that disease (but not any others) for one 
week.
Table 4.3.2 Diseases
d6 
Disease  
 
Effect
1 
Gutrot   
 
Your insides churn and swirl and nausea hits you in waves. Keeping down any  
 
 
 
 
food is  hard and you may only benefit from eating rations once per day whilst you 
have gutrot.  It lasts for 1d6 days.
2 
The Shivers 
 
Your skin feels cold and clammy and uncontrollable shivers ra8le your bones. You 
must suffer a penalty of -2 to all skill rolls for physical activities (combat, jumping, 
climbing etc) whilst your body shudders. The Shivers last for 1d3 days.
3 
Boils 
 
 
Agonising boils have appeared on your skin in a number of awkward and  
 
 
 
 
embarrassing locations. Even with bandaging and ointment, moving can result in 
 
 
 
 
the sudden pain of a burst boil. Anytime you undertake a physical activity, roll a  
 
 
 
 
1d6. On a 1 or 2 you have squeezed a boil and suffer a -2 penalty to SKILL for that 
round due to the pain. Boils last for 1d6 days.
4 
Thunder Head 
You awake with a cracking, throbbing headache and blurred vision. As you  
 
 
 
 
stagger out of bed, shielding your eyes against the light, you realise that the next  
 
 
 
 
few days are going to  be a struggle. All activities that involve thinking (social  
 
 
 
 
skills, Lore skills, using Sorcery or Magic) suffer a -2 penalty due to your pounding 
head. Thunder Head lasts 1d3 days.
5 
The Bubbles 
 
Sounds nice doesn’t it? Well it isn’t. Somewhere inside of you gas is being  
 
 
 
 
produced at a tremendous rate and escaping out of both ends. As well as feeling  
 
 
 
 
bloated you are constantly either belching or farting, causing you to suffer a -1  
 
 
 
 
penalty on tests of Etique8e, Con, Bargain and Leadership. The Bubbles last for  
 
 
 
 
1d6 days.
6 
Lice 
 
 
Somewhere along the way, you have become home to a particularly fertile family 
 
 
 
 
of lice and you are now crawling with the things, causing you to itch and scratch  
 
 
 
 
day and night.  You can ignore it in an emergency, but it does make sleeping  
 
 
 
 
difficult - you can only gain  1 point of STAMINA per night of sleep whilst  
 
 
 
 
suffering from lice, which lasts for 1d6 days.


--- PAGE 126 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
125
C10 Goblin Infiltrator
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
8
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Short Sword
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Unbeknownst to you a sneaky goblin infiltrator has 
been lurking here, waiting for a victim. As you 
approach it leaps from its cover to a8ack you! You 
must make an Awareness special skill roll, to see if 
you are surprised on the first round of combat. After 
that, it is a straight fight to the death - if you survive, 
you may move on to your next encounter.
C11 Burning House
Passing by a group of wooden dwellings, you hear a 
commotion and shouting voices. A moment later the 
smell of smoke hits you - one of the houses has caught 
fire! A woman stands outside trying to beat at the 
flames with a broom and a child is dashing off in 
search of water. A few people have stopped to look 
and are wondering what to do.  What do you do? 
● Walk on by. This isn’t a problem you are interested 
in. Move on to your next encounter. 
● Try and rouse other people to help fight the fire. 
Make a Leadership skill roll, if successful you round 
up a chain-gang to bring water and put out the fire. 
You are rewarded with a hearty meal (eat it now or 
add one to your provisions).
● Dive in and a8ack the fire yourself; every round 
you must roll against Dodge skill or take one point of 
damage. If you survive 6 rounds of firefighting you 
have put it out almost single handedly. As a reward 
the householder gives you a family heirloom; a silver 
pendant cast in the shape of a fox with a piece of 
amber for an eye. It is a pre8y piece of jewellery, 
worth 5gp if you want to sell it. 
C12 Mass Brawl!
You were lost in your thoughts for once and had 
barely noticed a commotion starting in the people 
nearby. Something about cabbages and a goat 
perhaps? You have no time to find out as you are 
startled by the whoosh of half-brick as it passes 
within an inch of your face. Suddenly very awake 
you realise that whatever the argument was, it has 
descended into a mass brawl, with people swinging 
fists, clubs, chairs or whatever else comes to hand - 
you see a plump washerwoman give someone a hard 
crack to the side of the head with her chamberpot and 
duck just in time to avoid ge8ing covered by its 
contents. You have seconds to decide what to do! 
●This is madness! You look around for a quiet spot 
and start to duck and dive your way towards it. Test 
against your Dodge three times. Each time you fail, 
you take one point of STAMINA damage as you get 
clunked by a fist or foot. Once you have made the 
tests you have successfully wriggled your way into a 
hiding spot and can wait until the brawl ends. 
● Wahey! This is what you’ve been looking for - you 
enthusiastically join in with the violence, swinging 
left right and centre with a huge grin plastered on 
your face. The brawl is fought as if it was a single 
creature with SKILL 8, using a Club as its damage 
type. It has no STAMINA score (injured participants 
crawl off) but keep track of how much damage you 
do each round. You must fight for six rounds before it 
dissipates - if you do more damage to the brawl than 
it has done to you, everyone is highly impressed and 
your next Con or Leadership roll gains a +2 bonus. 
● Someone could get killed over cabbages? You let 
out a mighty roar and and bellow at them demanding 
they come to their senses and stop fighting. Make a 
Leadership or Law roll. If you succeed, the crowd 
puts down its weapons and skulks off. Gain +1 to 
your next Leadership roll due to newfound 
confidence. If you fail, you are subject to a barrage of 
objects - take 1d6 points of STAMINA damage as you 
flee - move to a new location on your map.


--- PAGE 127 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
126
C13 Hobgoblin Spy
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Sword
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
You were taking a moment to yourself whilst 
standing in a shady corner, looking around at the 
bustle and hurry of the streets when you notice 
another figure also standing in the shadows, 
observing the crowd. Curious about this you move a 
li8le closer to get a be8er look. 
As you close in, your curiosity increases - they appear 
to be armed and something about their posture 
disturbs you. As you mull this over and their cowled 
head whips around, revealing the twisted features of 
a hobgoblin! It must be here spying out a place to 
raid! With a rasping hiss the hobgoblin leaps to a8ack 
you, as the nearby townsfolk sca8er in fright.
Special: The Hobgoblin Spy wants to escape rather 
than fight to the death. If it is reduced below 5 
STAMINA it will a8empt to flee. It is fleet of foot and 
agile, so it will clamber over the rooftops and walls to 
get away. 
If you wish to pursue it, you must make a Climbing 
skill roll for each round of pursuit to keep up with the 
Hobgoblin. It will however drop its sword when it 
flees. Should you kill it, you can claim a bounty of 
2d6gp the next time you visit the ‘Keep’ location.
C14 Runaway Horse
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Hooves (Small Claw)
A8acking this creature is an Unlawful Action.
A cry of ‘Gangway! Gangwaaaay!’ startles you into 
turning around just in time to see a young man lose 
control of his horse which throws its rider and bolts, 
straight towards you! If you don’t take action it will 
surely crash into you at high speed. 
● Try to get out of the way - you can use your Dodge, 
Jump or Acrobatics skill to hurl yourself to one side 
before you are trampled. If you fail the test, you are 
struck by the horse and bowled along the cobbles, 
suffering 1d6 points of STAMINA damage. 
● Try to grab the reins! You can use either Animal 
Lore or Ride skill as you a8empt to control the beast. 
If you succeed, you manage to grab hold of it and rein 
it in. Gain +1 to your next Leadership skill roll as the 
locals applaud your bravery. If you fail, the horse is 
not impressed and knocks you flying - suffer 1d6 
points of STAMINA damage.


--- PAGE 128 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
127
C15 Wrestling Contest
A large group of peasants and townsfolk has 
gathered in a doughnut shaped crowd around 
something that is causing them to cheer and shout in 
excitement. Ge8ing closer you can see that in the 
middle a wrestling match is taking place, with the 
two competitors rolling about in dirt grunting and 
heaving as they try to gain an advantage. 
There seems to be a referee in charge of it and around 
the edge of the ring - which has no rope to mark it - 
you can see frantic be8ing activity taking place. You 
note that there are a couple of Watchmen in the 
crowd, enjoying the spectacle, so you think it’s 
probably not against the local laws. 
As the contest comes to an end with one man 
slapping the ground in submission, the referee goes 
around se8ling the bets and calling out to the crowd 
asking for challengers. It looks like you could step up 
if you want to fight?
If you choose to fight, a greasy man explains the 
rules: you will need to be unarmoured and leave your 
weapons to one side. No magic of any kind is 
tolerated. You fight five ‘rounds’ that last one minute 
each, though only one SKILL roll is made for each 
round. 
Use Brawling skill if you have it. Both fighters are 
unarmoured and use the Unarmed damage table. 
Record STAMINA damage separately to normal 
damage, it is temporary fatigue and can be recovered 
by resting for a few minutes between bouts. If you are 
reduced to zero STAMINA you have been choked 
(knocked) out and lose, you will recover a few 
minutes later with a sore head as your only reward.
First Challenge: ‘Dirty’ Hans. SKILL 6 STAMINA 7. 
At the start each ‘round’ roll a 1d6 - on a 1 or 2 ‘Dirty’ 
Hans has grabbed you in a delicate spot (a big ‘oooh’ 
from the crowd) and the pain causes you a -2 penalty 
to your SKILL for that round. If you win, you get a 
purse of 5gp as reward and can move onto the next 
fight. 
Second Challenge: ‘Knuckles’ O’Reilly. SKILL 6 
STAMINA 8. ‘Knuckles’ likes to go for the uppercut. 
If you lose a round to him, it means he has caught you 
square on the chin with a hard right hand and take an 
extra point of damage to your STAMINA in addition 
to the amount rolled. If you defeat ‘Knuckles’ you 
receive a purse of 10gp and can challenge Borkin.
Final Challenge: ‘Brickhead’ Borkin. SKILL 7 
STAMINA 9. As well as being natural sprinters, the 
low centre of gravity and general toughness of 
Dwarves makes them excellent grapplers. 
Each ‘round’ you fight Borkin, roll 1d6. On a 1,2 or 3 
Borkin has headbu8ed you in the guts causing one 
point of STAMINA damage and -1 to SKILL due to 
nausea. The nausea penalty lasts for the whole 
contest and adds up! If you defeat this champion, you 
get a purse of 15gp, a massive cheer from the crowd 
and +1 to your next two Leadership rolls in this 
se8lement.
You can of course simply watch the contest and take 
no part. In which case, move on to your next 
encounter.


--- PAGE 129 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
128
C16 Cu=hroats
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
1 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass 
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking these people is an Unlawful Action.
Oh dear. A pair of Cu8hroats have found you, with 
the sure and malicious belief that they can separate 
you from your fortune. 
Make a test of Awareness skill. If you pass, you 
realise that they are upon you a moment before they 
strike and you can fight the combat as normal. If you 
fail the test, they have managed to sneak up on you 
and gain a bonus of +2 to their SKILL in the first 
round of combat, as they seek to finish you off as 
quickly as possible.
You must fight both of them at once. If you defeat 
one, you may make a test against your Con skill - if 
you succeed the other cu8hroat flees. If you fail the 
test he will stay and try to avenge his fallen 
accomplice.
If you don’t wish to fight, you can try (after the first 
round) to pay them off. Make a Bargain skill roll, with 
a bonus of one for every extra gold piece you are 
willing to offer - if you succeed you pay them 2d6 
gold pieces (plus whatever you offered as a bribe) 
and they decide to take their ill go8en gains and slink 
back into the shadows.
C17 Ratman
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
Leather Cuiras 
Weapon:  
Short Sword
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Many cities are built on the ruins of previous 
se8lements or have forgo8en dungeons and cellars 
where the creatures of chaos creep in and take up 
residence. 
At night, they creep out again to raid and kill. The 
ratmen infest almost every city to some extent as they 
are nearly impossible to wipe out. This one has 
slithered out from some nearby hole and has been 
lurking in the shadows ready to spring out on its 
victim - you! 
Make an Awareness skill test. If you succeed, you 
notice it moments before it strikes and fight as 
normal. If you fail the test it has caught you unaware 
and gains a +2 bonus on its SKILL combat roll in the 
first round.
In addition, Ratmen are covered in filth and muck. If 
you are wounded in this combat, you must test your 
LUCK or contract a disease - roll on Table 4.3.2 
Diseases to see what nasty surprise awaits you!


--- PAGE 130 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
129
C18 Fire Sprite Arsonist
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
5
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Fiery Bolts  (automatically hit and 
cause 2 points of STAMINA damage).
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Cries of ‘help!’ and ‘save us!’ alert you to a nearby 
commotion. It appears a fire sprite has travelled from 
the elemental plane of fire to burn whatever it can 
find, which at the moment includes people’s hats, 
hair and houses. 
The sprite is leaping nimbly from rooftop to rooftop 
and raining down small firebolts on the peasants and 
their dwellings. People are caught between diving 
into cover to avoid ge8ing scorched, or ge8ing 
buckets and water to put out the fires that are starting 
to take hold on the roofs and timbers. This could 
become a very dangerous situation! What do you do? 
● Decide it’s probably someone else’s problem and 
move on to another location. The peasants are not 
impressed, jeering at your cowardice. Your next 
Leadership skill roll has a -1 penalty. 
● Rush to help - the sprite is hard to reach without a 
ranged weapon or spell, and you must pass a test 
against your Jump skill to reach it. If you fail the test 
you have a -2 penalty to your combat SKILL roll as it 
dances away from your reach. The sprite is angered 
by your interference and will launch a fiery bolt at 
you every time you succeed in hi8ing it. Should you 
defeat the sprite the grateful people give you 1d6gp 
as a reward. 
C19 Ravenous Slime
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapon:  
Acid Touch
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Special: If this a8ack hits, it sprays acid on to you, 
causing 3 points of damage. Armour protects from 
this but at a cost - for each point of damage your 
armour absorbs, you will need to spend one gold 
piece repairing it or suffer a -1 penalty to your 
armour rolls until you do so. 
The touch of chaos is upon the land, even in civilised 
places, twisting life into new and strange forms. Here 
it has found a host in a colony of slime moulds and 
grown into a hungry, dangerous beast. 
The Ravenous Slime at first appears to be a large pile 
of trash - pieces of wood, leaves, scraps of clothing, 
the bones of some unfortunate animal and so on but 
as you approach it lurches up and slithers rapidly 
towards you, sending out long tentacle feelers that 
are dripping with acid - it means to devour you! You 
must fight it or end up as its next meal.
.


--- PAGE 131 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
130
C20 Giant Spider
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
Light
Weapon:  
Large Bite
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Ski8ering hideously from its hiding place comes a 
monstrosity straight out of your nightmares - a 
leathery, eight legged hunting machine with venom 
dripping from its fangs. 
This one must have crept into the city and found a 
place where it can hide and prey on anyone 
unfortunate enough to come by its lair. You will be 
doing everyone a favour if you can dispatch it. In 
addition to the normal damage from the bite, it will 
inject you with venom if it hits. Test against your 
LUCK or become poisoned. 
Each dose of poison reduces your SKILL by 1 for one 
hour. This adds up - if your SKILL is reduced to zero 
you will be paralysed...and your fate is not a pre8y 
one as the spider devours you.
If you defeat the Giant Spider you can a8empt to cut 
out its venom glands - it is a tricky task that requires 
you to pass an Animal Lore skill test, but if you 
succeed you may sell the glands for 10gp or use them 
to coat your weapons with a poison that does 1 
additional point of damage each time you hit for the 
duration of one combat, or can coat 10 arrows or 
crossbow bolts for the same effect.
C21 Troglodytes
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
4
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
Light 
Weapon:  
Shortbow, Club
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
These li8le demon worshipping terrors are found 
throughout Titan, hiding in any dark place such as an 
abandoned cellar or the sewers of a city. They are 
usually found in large groups but in this case you 
have stumbled on a pair that are out foraging or 
scouting away from their tribe. They are vicious but 
fearful. In the first round they will shoot with their 
bows - they are very skilled and gain a +2 on their 
combat rolls with a bow - but in the next round they 
will try to flee. If you wish to, you can pursue and 
fight them or if you would rather not, you can let 
them scu8le off back to the holes they crept out of.


--- PAGE 132 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
131
C22 Leaf Beasts
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
3
Social Rank:  
- 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Large Bite
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
It is perhaps embarrassing and certainly un-heroic to 
find oneself in combat with a bush, but it appears that 
you will have to fight this shrubbery or perish! 
You had mistaken it for a normal, if very healthy 
looking piece of hedgerow before you came too close 
and were startled to find it taking on the form of two 
leafy bears and lunging their twigs and branches 
toward you! In fact, you must make an Awareness 
skill test - if you fail, you are so surprised that they 
automatically hit you on the first round of combat. 
After that you can choose to stay and slay the 
arboreal terror - you’ll be 
doing everyone a favour - or 
simply take a few steps back 
out of its range. If you back 
off, it grasps for you a few 
times before transforming 
back 
into 
an 
ordinary 
looking plant. It’s strange 
nature means that it takes no 
damage from arrows or bolts 
and reduces damage from 
stabbing 
weapons, 
like 
spears, by one point per hit.
If you do fight and defeat the 
Leaf Beast you can take a 
cu8ing from its stem which, 
due to its magical nature, is 
worth 5gp.
C23 Slave Takers
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
1
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Club
A8acking these people is not an Unlawful Action.
Lurching from their hiding spot in a nearby alleyway 
are two rough men dressed in shabby clothing with a 
collection of interesting ta8oos and scars on their 
faces. They are clearly coming towards you and you 
notice with alarm that one of them is carrying a net 
and manacles! 
Although slavery is generally illegal, the laws are 
rarely enforced and men such as these are employed 
to drag the unfortunate away to a life of servitude in 
some form of hard labour. Most end up deep in a 
mine or shackled to the oars of a pirate ship. Your 
only way to avoid this is to fight.
Special: The first time one of 
the Slave Takers hits you, 
they will do no damage but 
instead wrap you in a 
weighted net. This causes 
you a penalty of -2 to your 
SKILL until you spend a 
whole 
round 
untangling 
yourself.


--- PAGE 133 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
132
C24 Grannits
SKILL   
4
STAMINA  
3
Social Rank:  
-
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapon:  
Small Claw
A8acking these creatures is not an Unlawful Action.
These crab-like creatures, covered in hard plates of 
bone, infest the catacombs beneath the city. 
Occasionally they will venture out onto the surface in 
the hunt for a tasty meal. The usual way of 
discovering their presence is the remains of the 
domestic animals they have eaten or finding holes 
chewed through the walls near any food store. They 
may be small (about coconut sized) but they are 
extremely vicious and good at ambushing. Their first 
a8ack will always cause 1 point of stamina damage as 
they scurry in for a bite.
C25 Skeleton
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
6
Social Rank:  
-
Armour:  
Small Shield 
Weapon:  
Sword
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
With a clickety-clack of ra8ling bone, a skeleton 
lurches towards you swinging its sword, a cold blue 
light of necromantic magic glowing in its empty eye 
sockets! You have no time to wonder if it lurched out 
of a nearby crypt or was summoned here to a8ack 
you, you must defend yourself!
Note that the bony nature of this monster means 
edged and pointed weapons such as swords and 
spears do one point less of damage per hit.
C26 Orc Raider
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
9
Social Rank:  
-
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Ba8le Axe
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Orcs infest the dark corners of every kingdom and 
nowhere is entirely safe from their a8acks. It is a 
custom amongst many orc tribes to send a young 
warrior out to sneak into enemy (usually human) 
territory to cause chaos of one kind or another - 
stealing, fighting and slave-taking are the common 
reasons. The orcs move by night and rely on stealth 
and intimidation to avoid detection. This one has 
decided - perhaps unwisely - that you would be a 
good victim. Pulling back its hood and le8ing out a 
snarl of hatred, the orc gives you no option but to 
fight!


--- PAGE 134 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
133
 C27 Swarm of Rats
What begins as a pleasant noise, like the rustling of 
leaves in a breeze, rapidly turns to horror as you hear 
the squeaking and scratching of thousands of tiny 
claws - a swarm of rats has been driven out of their 
nest and are surging towards you, their eyes 
gleaming with maddened hunger. You need to do 
something or risk being overrun! 
● Try to get out of their way: You may make a test 
against either your Climb or Acrobatics skills to make 
a leap to safety and cling on to some nearby surface 
whilst the swarm passes. 
● Do you have a torch to hand or some means of 
making fire? If so you can try to ward off the swarm 
by using their fear of fire to keep them at bay. If you 
choose this option, test against your Animal Lore skill 
to see if you can pull it off. If you succeed the swarm 
goes around your barrier. 
● Fight them! You can’t hope to kill them all as they 
pass, but maybe you can defend yourself. Make a test 
against your weapon skill but with a -3 penalty due 
to the number of opponents. If you succeed you have 
managed to keep them at bay as they pass. 
● Stand very still and hope for the best: You may test 
your LUCK to see if the rats simply decide you are 
not worth it (maybe your feet don’t smell too tasty?). 
If you succeed you close your eyes and pray and 
when you open them again the swarm has passed.
If you fail to avoid the swarm by some means you are 
bi8en, chewed and gnawed on - take 1d3+1 points of 
STAMINA damage and roll on the diseases table 
(Table 4.3.2 Diseases).
C28 Monstrous Fly
SKILL   
1
STAMINA  
2
Social Rank:  
-
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
See Below
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
Perhaps it was a maggot laid on the body of a chaos 
warped beast, or maybe it drank a sip from the spilled 
liquids of a potion maker's workbench, for whatever 
reason a fly has grown to horrific size. As big as a 
crow and dripping diseased fluids from its finger like 
proboscis, this foul creature buzzes through the city 
looking for warm blood to slurp on. The Monstrous 
Fly is not dangerous in combat - it is too large and 
clumsy to dart out of the way like its tiny brethren - 
but instead relies on stealth and surprise.
To avoid the a8ack you must make a test against your 
Awareness skill. If you succeed you can fight the fly 
as a normal combatant to avoid its bite. If you fail the 
test (or if the fly beats you in combat) it swoops in and 
latches onto you for a moment, sucking on your 
blood. This causes one point of STAMINA damage 
and injects you with its filth. You must test against 
your LUCK or contract shivering disease: within 
minutes you feel chilled to your bones and start 
shivering as if you were naked on a mountaintop. 
Your maximum STAMINA is reduced by one and 
your Combat and Movement skills suffer a -1 penalty. 
The disease lasts for 1d6 days and each day your 
maximum STAMINA falls by one and you suffer a 
further -1 penalty to your Combat and Movement 
skills. If you survive, your health returns after a full 
night's rest and all penalties are removed. You may 
want to go and see a healer…
After one bite the fly will buzz off to seek a new 
victim, though you can try to swipe at it as it leaves 
for the sake of stopping its horrible work - you’ll be 
doing everyone a favour.


--- PAGE 135 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
134
C29 Chaos Horror
SKILL   
See Below
STAMINA  
See Below
Social Rank:  
-1
Armour:  
See Below
Weapon:  
See Below
A8acking this creature is not an Unlawful Action.
A chill runs down your spine and a feeling of dread 
se8les on your mind - looking around you can see 
nothing at first, but you have blundered into a bubble 
of raw chaotic magic. It seems as if something is 
watching you intently then, very suddenly, a creature 
forms out of the air in front of you as if stepping 
through from some other plane of reality. You get a 
glimpse of sharp claws and teeth and eyes burning 
red with rage before it a8acks! The chaos horror is an 
amalgamation of different beasts, dredged from your 
subconscious - the head of a bear, the talons of an 
eagle and the body of a huge spider for example. All 
that really ma8ers is that it is full of fury. The beast 
draws its strength from you, so the difficulty of the 
fight will depend on how powerful a hero you are.
Hero Grade 
Chaos Horror
Civilian 
SKILL 1+1d6 STAMINA 3+1d6
Novice  
Weapon: Small Claw, Armour: Light
Competent 
SKILL 3+1d6 STAMINA 6+1d6
Veteran 
Weapon: Med Claw, Armour: Med
Expert  
SKILL 6+1d6 STAMINA 12+1d6
Master  
Weapon: Large Claw, Armour: Heavy
Grand Master
Once defeated, the Chaos Horror will disappear, 
twisting back through a hole in reality to whence it 
came with a wailing shriek of frustration.
C30 Tomb Mist
At first you ignore the fine mist that seems to be 
creeping up from the ground but as it thickens you 
start to worry. With alarming speed your vision is 
obscured by a freezing fog that leaves you fumbling 
in a whiteout with the temperature plummeting - you 
start to shiver. Clearly, this is no ordinary mist, but 
something malicious and predatory.
You must test your Awareness skill to escape from 
the Tomb Mist. Each round that you spend inside the 
mist, you lose 2 points of STAMINA as the cold 
leeches away your life. You must succeed three times 
with your Awareness skill (make one test each round) 
to find a way out. You may also test your LUCK to 
escape - if successful you stumble out of the mists in 
the same round, disorientated but alive.
There is no way for you to fight the Tomb Mist and 
even as you leave you see that the tendrils of vapour 
are starting to sink back into the ground, perhaps 
awaiting another victim.
Special: If your se8lement is in a particularly hot 
climate, the Tomb Mist is a swirling cloud of ash that 
burns you for 2 points of STAMINA damage until 
you escape it.


--- PAGE 136 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
135
4.4 Se=lement Map Encounters
The map generated at the start of exploring a city 
includes the major landmarks and streets, but does 
not include details of every li8le courtyard, side alley 
or unusual building that you might find as you 
navigate your way around. On the encounter tables, 
you might get a result which adds a new feature to 
your map. These should be marked on in some way, 
as they are (usually) permanent features that can be 
revisited later.
To be clear that means once you have recorded that 
you have found a Latrine (M9) near to the Garbage 
Heap, you can return there any time you are at that 
location to use the facilities.
As you build up your se8lement you can record 
details on your map or on a Se8lement Details Sheet 
- see 4.5 for an example.
Unlike other encounters Map encounters can only be 
rolled a certain number of times for each se8lement -  
a city can only have so many armourers before the 
local economy starts to suffer. The number that can be 
found is given next to the description. This is the 
suggested number for a city, you can add more if 
your city is particularly large. For a town or village, 
the maximum is one of each encounter per 
se8lement.
If you roll the same result at a later visit to a location, 
it simply means you have ended up passing by the 
same feature again.
Bargaining: Many of the map encounters are shops 
where you can buy or sell goods and services. Unless 
the description says otherwise, you can a8empt to 
make a Bargain skill roll to alter the price. A 
successful Bargain skill roll reduces the price by one 
quarter, a failed roll increases it by one quarter 
(round to the nearest gold piece). For example, if your 
hero is trying to buy a Long Sword at the 
Weaponsmith (M14). The normal price in a city is 
30gp (as listed in the Advanced Fighting Fantasy 
rulebook). With a successful skill roll that can be 
reduced to 22gp, but if you fail the roll the price 
increases to 38gp. Remember to apply the modifiers 
for Social Rank (chapter 7) and other modifiers as 
described in the core rulebook.
Temporary skill bonuses and penalties: Many of the 
encounters give you an opportunity to gain a bonus 
to a future skill use, though often at the risk of 
suffering a penalty. Such bonuses and penalties last 
until you use them (usually by making a skill test) or 
leave that se8lement for a day or more. Remember 
that if you want to retire to an inn or drinking den to 
‘wait it out’, you have to pay the cost of food and 
lodging. 
Table 4.4.1 Se=lement Map Encounters
M1 
Quiet Crossroads 
M16 
Devious Trap
M2  
Small Well 
 
M17 
Magic Upwell
M3 
Collapsing Ground 
M18 
Magic Door
M4 
Catacombs entrance M19 
Rogues Cubby
M5 
Quiet Fishing Spot 
M20 
Watchtower
M6 
Forgo8en Cellar 
M21 
Forgo8en Stash
M7 
Abandoned Shack 
M22 
Sorcerer Wyrd
M8 
Shrine  
 
M23 
Alchemist Lab
M9 
Latrine 
 
M24 
Execution Place
M10 
Smithy  
 
M25 
Ta8oo Parlour
M11 
Cartographers Shop M26 
Workshop
M12 
General Goods Kiosk M27 
Bathhouse
M13 
Armourer 
 
M28 
Stables
M14 
Weaponsmith  
M29 
Auction House
M15 
Magical Curiosities 
M30 
Shady Dealer


--- PAGE 137 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
136
M1 Quiet Crossroads
Suggested Maximum number: 6
Wandering through the streets you come across a 
quiet space where several roads meet. In the centre 
there is a water pump next to a stone bench, with a 
weathered, vine covered statue behind it. Make an 
Awareness skill roll; If successful you notice that 
there seems to be a map carved into the base of the 
statue. 
● If you noticed the map you may study it for a while 
a8empting to memorise the layout of streets closeby; 
gain a +2 bonus to your next City Lore skill roll. You 
may also stop and eat a meal here. 
● If you didn’t notice the map, you may stop and eat 
a meal, but there is nothing else to be done here. 
Carry on to your next encounter. You may re-roll to 
spot the map on one visit each day.
M2 Small Well
Suggested Maximum number: 6
You come across a circular structure of worked stones 
covered over with vines and some small bushes. On 
closer inspection you realise it is a forgo8en well. 
Clearing away some of the leaves  and brambles you 
can see that the well has water inside. 
● You aren’t thirsty at the moment, so you note the 
location and move on. If you pass through this 
location again you can make use of the well. 
● Do you have a rope and bucket? If so, you can make 
use of the well. The water is crystal clear, cool and 
delightfully refreshing. Add +1 LUCK point for your 
fortunate discovery (only gain this once for each 
well). You can also use the water to wash yourself 
clean, if you are in need of it.
M3 Collapsing Ground!
Maximum number: Treat as Catacombs Entrance, see 
Se3lement Location description. Ground is repaired after 
1d6 days.
Spying a quiet alleyway you decide that it is probably 
a shortcut to your destination, and nip down it. This 
cut-through is a bit ragged and untended with many 
plants pushing up past the cobbles and piles of 
rubbish to either side. Just as you are regre8ing your 
decision there is a cracking noise, followed by a 
rumble which is followed by a yelping shout - from 
you - as the ground beneath your feet gives way! You 
must react immediately. 
● A8empt to dive forward across the pit. You must 
make a SKILL roll using the Jump Skill or test your 
LUCK. If successful you may continue with your 
adventure, if you fail you fall down into the pit, 
suffering 2d6 points of damage. You may not use the 
Acrobatics skill to reduce damage as you have 
already tried to jump. 
● Accept your fate and try to minimise the damage. 
You suffer 2d6 points of damage which can be halved 
if you make an Acrobatics skill test or test your 
LUCK. If you wish to leave the pit, make a Climb skill 
test - failure results in a further 1d3 points of damage 
as you slither back down.
Either way, once the dust and stones se8le and you 
pick yourself up, you can see what caused the 
collapse. A large pipe - possibly an unused sewer  - 
has fallen in upon itself, maybe sapped by the endless 
tunnelling of rats. The rubble hasn’t completely 
blocked it and you can see the pipe continues into the 
darkness. If you so wish, you may use this as an 
entrance to the Catacombs (start generating a 
Catacombs map from this point) or you may ignore 
this and continue with your adventure. Mark this on 
your map as a Catacombs entrance.


--- PAGE 138 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
137
M4 Catacombs Entrance
Maximum number:  See description of Catacombs entrance 
as a Se3lement Location.
Trying to navigate the maze-like city you have 
become a li8le bit lost and wandered into a rougher 
part of town. The streets here are dirtier, the houses 
more ramshackle and the people dressed in rags and 
patched up clothing. You begin to feel uneasy when 
you notice a large group of young men coming along 
the road, mu8ering amongst themselves, banging 
sticks and clubs against the house walls as they go. 
Concerned, you slip down a narrow side alley that is 
choked with rubbish. There is half a barrel leaning up 
against a wall and you duck down behind it hoping 
the mob will pass you by. Your plan seems to be 
working and as the last of the men pass by you get 
ready to move on, when you feel the ground shifting 
beneath you. There is no time to react as a large hole 
opens up in the ground and you crash downward 
through a cloud of dirt, cobble stones and ro8en 
wood. The fall is thankfully not long and more of a 
slither across some hidden slope. 
Coughing and splu8ering you sit up and take a 
moment to check yourself, before looking around at 
your new surroundings. The hole you made is le8ing 
in enough light to see by. It appears you have slid 
down an old chimney funnel - of which only half is 
standing - into what must once have been the main 
room of a house, all now buried under the cities’ 
current surface level. Around you, covered in dust 
and rubble you can make out some walls, a dirt floor, 
broken pieces of furniture and a doorway. There is no 
door, just a rectangle of darkness. For a moment you 
are sure you hear something moving around, a sort of 
scuffling, scratchy sound that sends shivers down 
your spine. Feeling uneasy you draw your weapon 
and consider your choices. You could climb back out, 
but now that you are here maybe you should explore 
some more? What do you do? 
● Mark the location on your map but move on for 
now. You can return to this location to use this 
entrance at a later time during this visit to this area. 
However, if you leave this place for 1d6+3 days the 
locals will have sealed it up again. 
● Drawing your weapon and readying yourself, you 
slide down into the darkness to explore. You should 
now refer to the Catacombs Entrance location in 
section 4.1 to help you create a mini-dungeon.
M5 Quiet Fishing Spot
Suggested Maximum number: 4
You’ve found a quiet spot down by the edge of a pool, 
where the roots of a willow tree provide a natural seat 
and tall reeds shield you from prying eyes. If you 
wish to, you can sit here for a while and enjoy the 
serenity as a break from adventuring. 
If you have a fishing rod or net you can spend half a 
day trying to catch something. Make a Fishing skill 
roll with a +3 bonus, if you succeed you catch 1d6 
meals worth of fish. If you fail, all you recover is a 
muddy old boot. 
In addition, this secluded spot would be an ideal 
place to bathe - when was the last time you got 
yourself clean?
Special: If your se8lement is in a hot, dry climate you 
can replace the quiet fishing spot with a spot where 
you can use your Hunting skill to capture 
particularly delicious lizards, though you cannot 
bathe here.


--- PAGE 139 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
138
M6 Forgo=en Cellar
Suggested Maximum number: 5
You notice a ro8ing wooden door that is almost 
completely obscured by a heavy layer of creepers and 
vines. Trying the handle, you find it is stiff but not 
locked. You push the vines aside and open the door -  
moving slightly into the space before you reveals a 
vaulted chamber made from well cut stone. The 
chamber stretches away and you guess it is about 60’ 
long, but only 15’ wide. It is cool and dry, which has 
helped preserve the shelving that lines both walls, 
leaving only an unobstructed 5’ wide path down the 
middle of the room. Sadly the contents of the shelves 
have not fared well. Broken bo8les and smashed 
casks li8er the floor, making a li8le crunching noise 
as you take a step forward. It is as if a great gust of 
wind has blown through here, hurling everything 
movable up into the air then slamming it into the cut 
stone floor. The room has a sweet but not unpleasant 
smell of spilt wine still lingering after who knows 
how many years of abandonment. What do you do? 
● Seems like you are very late to this party - You close 
the door and move on with your adventure. 
● Moving carefully amongst the broken glass and 
cask fragments, I’ll search the room. If you have a 
torch to light (it’s dark in here) you can make an 
Awareness roll with a -3 penalty. If you succeed you 
find a preserved bo8le of fine wine. You can drink it, 
or if you keep it you can offer it to someone you 
encounter to gain +2 on your Bribery Skill roll. 
● A sudden, irresistible, thought comes to you. 
Pu8ing your shoulder to the side of one of the shelves 
you give it a hard shove - make a Strength skill roll - 
and watch with glee as the entire row of shelving 
smashes into each other and topples over. Enjoying 
yourself you repeat the trick with the other side. As 
the noise fades you realise you might have alerted 
someone…..roll on Table 5.6 Random Monster 
Encounters. (if you fail the Strength roll, you just get 
a small bruise to your shoulder and your pride and 
should move sheepishly onto your next encounter).
M7 Abandoned Shack
Suggested Maximum number: 6
With ro8ed beams that creak ominously in the 
slightest breeze, patchwork boards pierced by so 
many holes that it is no warmer inside than outside 
and a roof with enough tiles missing to ensure that 
hardly a patch of the dirt floor is kept dry from the 
rain, this lean-to shack has clearly been abandoned 
and left to decay. 
Still, it is tucked up in a quiet corner of another 
building and out of sight from the street, so it is 
unlikely you will be disturbed here. 
● You may rest here if you wish, without having to 
pay for accommodation. It is not entirely peaceful 
and you only recover 3 points of STAMINA instead of 
the usual 4. 
● You may sit here for a while, clean your weapons, 
tidy your pack or eat your rations. You can hear the 
noises of the city around you but no one comes to 
disturb your camp. 
● You can’t miss out on this opportunity for wanton 
destruction. Taking your weapon in your hands, you 
start knocking chunks of wood and board away - a 
savage delight fills you and after a few sweaty 
minutes of hacking and bashing, you have reduced 
this hovel to sticks and dust. Brushing yourself down 
and catching your breath, you survey your 
handiwork one last time before continuing with your 
adventures. Is ‘Destroyer of Shacks’ your new 
nickname? In any case, remove this place from your 
map.


--- PAGE 140 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
139
M8 Shrine
Suggested Maximum number: 8
You notice a small shrine has been erected here, no 
bigger than a window, built into the stonework of a 
building. A carving of a religious scene forms the 
main part of the shrine and it is decorated with 
candles and iconographs - wooden boards crudely 
painted with sacred images. It is clearly well tended, 
but there is nobody about at the moment. Moving 
closer you can try and discern which god it is 
dedicated to, and maybe make an offering of prayer. 
Firstly roll 2d6; if you get a total of 11 or 12 the shrine 
is dedicated to the god you follow and you can pray 
here once each day to restore one point of STAMINA. 
If not, make a Religious Lore special skill roll. If you 
succeed you have correctly understood the nature of 
this shrine and can, if you wish, offer a prayer in the 
correct manner. Roll 1d6 - on a roll of a 5 or 6, the 
gods smile upon you and restore 1 point of 
STAMINA. If you fail the Religious Lore special skill, 
you are praying to the wrong gods...roll 1d6 - on a roll 
of a 1 or 2 the gods have noticed your transgression 
and smite you - lose 1 point of STAMINA. 
Once you have found this shrine you may mark it on 
your map. You may pray here at most once per week.
Specific God: Whilst your se8lement or region might 
be dedicated to a specific god or gods, people and 
small groups may still erect shrines to other deities. 
You can refer to Chapter 7 Political Systems & 
Religion, to find out what the dominant religions are 
and determine which specific god this shrine is 
dedicated to. If the specific god is one that you are a 
follower of, you will automatically restore 1 point of 
STAMINA by praying here, this can only be done 
once per day.
M9 Latrine
Suggested Maximum number: 1 per location, ten per city.
Whilst most ‘needs’ are taken care of by finding a 
quiet spot, some of the more generous nobles, 
desiring a cleaner and sweeter smelling city, will 
fund the construction of a public latrine such as this 
one. Two narrow wooden huts are placed back to 
back (one for men, one for women) over a pipe 
leading down into the sewers - or sometimes just into 
a pit that needs to be dug out from time to time. 
That job is done by the surprisingly cheerful looking 
old man who is sat on a stool in a small wooden booth 
just by the entrance to the latrine, grinning and 
nodding at his grateful customers. A bucket and mop 
are leant up against his booth.  For 2 silver pieces he 
will sell you a bit of moss or some rags to wipe with, 
but you can ‘bring your own’ if you want.
Inside the hut there is a single stall, with one long 
bench against the back wall of the hut and four seats 
available. The air is foetid and rank, with many flies 
buzzing here and there. It is best not to look down the 
hole if you value your sanity, but you can engage in 
conversation with your bench-fellows. Roll once on 
the rumours table should you wish to do this.
Every time you use the latrine, you must roll a 1d6 - 
on a roll of a 1, a Giant Rat is occupying the hut and 
you must decide if you wish to fight it (see the Giant 
Rat encounter C9) or hold on for now. If you do 
defeat this guardian of the privy, the grateful 
a8endant will waive the usual fee and give you a 
handful of his softest moss as a reward.


--- PAGE 141 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
140
M10  Smithy
Suggested Maximum number: 3
Dwarven Smith 
Human Smith
SKILL   
7 
 
 
6
STAMINA  
10 
 
 
9
Social Rank:  
6  
 
 
6
Armour:  
Chain Hauberk  
Chain Hauberk
Weapon:  
Warhammer  
Warhammer
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
The familiar clang-clonk double beat of metal being 
worked alerts you to the presence of a smithy some 
time before you see it. Set back from the main road 
you see a well ordered workshop built around a forge 
that, even from this distance, is warming your face. 
A pair of blacksmiths, one human and one dwarvish, 
stand either side of the furnace and are taking turns 
heating and hammering their respective pieces of 
work. A dog is lying near the entrance of the 
workshop, enjoying the heat. As you approach it 
looks around and barks once before returning its chin 
to the ground and the blacksmiths both turn to look 
at you. They are clearly busy, but seem friendly 
enough. What do you do? 
● You have no need of their services at the moment, 
so you simply nod a greeting and move on. Mark the 
Smithy on your map, in case you wish to return here 
later. 
● Both your armour and weapons have seen be8er 
days. You ask them what can be done, and in between 
blows of their hammer they offer you a number of 
services they can provide. They are very busy, so you 
may only choose one of these services each day. After 
you have made your choice and paid, mark the 
Smithy on your map so you can return to it later.
Service  
 
 
 
Cost  
Time
Weapons - the blacksmith will hone 10gp 
2 hours
 the edge of swords or rebalance 
your mace such that you gain 
+1 SKILL for your combat rolls in 
your next combat. This will also 
repair any damage to your weapons.
Armour - the blacksmith will take  
5gp 
2 hours
your armour, knock out the dents 
and tighten up the straps and 
buckles so that you gain +1 to your 
Armour rolls for your next combat. 
This will also repair any damage to 
your Armour.
Trading - the blacksmiths have  
As core   1 hour
available the weapons and armour  rulebook
as listed in the AFF core rules book. 
If you wish to haggle, make a 
Bargain skill roll.
● These fools have a rich store of weapons and not 
enough guards. A8ack! Resolve the combat as 
normal. Should you defeat them, you can loot three 
weapons or one piece of armour before the 
commotion a8racts the locals. This is an Unlawful 
Action and because blacksmiths are so highly 
regarded by their communities, you must roll twice 
on the Lawbreaker table with a -3 penalty. In 
addition, you may not mark this Smithy on the map 
for later use.


--- PAGE 142 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
141
M11 Cartographers Shop
Suggested Maximum number: 1
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
8
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
None
Weapon:  
Dagger
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
In addition, if you do a8ack them you cannot return 
to this shop and you should remove it from your 
map.
In your wandering you have come across a shop 
selling maps. It occupies the ground floor of a modest 
wood frame house and in the window you can see a 
number of large maps of various locations in Titan, 
few of which you recognise. 
The door is open and you can dimly see a middle 
aged woman sat at a desk near the back of the room, 
she is currently engrossed in a book and has not 
noticed you. Given your profession this shop might 
be a very lucky find, so you stop outside to take a 
closer look. What do you do? 
● You prefer to rely on your own skills and wits, so 
after admiring the goods for a moment longer you 
move on. 
● You enter the shop and talk to the map maker, 
asking if she has anything in stock that might be of 
use to you. She offers you a variety of maps, though 
they aren’t cheap. You can buy maps of this location, 
or the wilderness. Each map you buy costs 20gp and 
fills up one inventory slot (they are large and 
unwieldy) but will give you a +1 on your City Lore or 
Region Lore rolls whilst you carry it. Each Se8lement 
or Region requires its own map. 
● You move into the shop but after talking to the map 
maker you realise these goods are way too expensive. 
If you wish to, you could use the Sleight of Hand skill 
to steal a map  - you have noticed one that covers 
your current location. The maps are not an easy object 
to conceal quickly so the SKILL check has a -2 
penalty. If you succeed, you gain a +1 bonus to City 
Lore SKILL checks whilst in this city, but the map 
does take up one inventory slot. If you fail the check, 
the enraged map maker bustles you out of her shop 
whilst calling for the guards, you decide it is time to 
move on. If you are noticed, you may not return to 
this shop for 2d6 days. 
● You are lost in this se8lement and need directions: 
For a small fee (5gp) she can direct you to a specific 
location - you can use this knowledge to choose a 
specific map encounter at a location of your choice. 
The cartographer is quite busy and will only give out 
detailed directions once each day.


--- PAGE 143 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
142
M12 General Goods kiosk
Suggested Maximum number: 3
SKILL   
6
STAMINA  
7
Social Rank:  
3
Armour:  
None
Weapon:  
Hand Axe
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action. In 
addition, if you do a8ack them you cannot return to 
this shop for one week.
Pushed up against the side of a larger building and 
indeed taking some shelter from the bigger structure, 
is an intriguing and well made kiosk. It consists of an 
open fronted hut under a brightly dyed canvas 
awning, with several well stocked wooden racks set 
about it. Si8ing on a tall chair inside the hut is a 
contented dwarf, puffing on a large clay pipe. 
She waves at you and beckons you over to her shop. 
It is somewhat unusual to see a kiosk like this away 
from the marketplace, but you guess this dwarf has 
struck a deal with the owners of the larger building to 
let her carry out her trade here. Mark this on your 
map for future use.
This small store sells food and drink and everyday 
household items at the prices listed in the AFF 
guidebook (the ‘General Equipment’ part of the price 
list), but it doesn’t sell or trade in armour or weapons 
- you will need to find a more specialised outlet for 
that type of item. After you have bought or sold 
(remember to make your Bargain skill rolls if you 
wish to haggle!) you wave goodbye to the dwarf and 
continue your travels.
M13 Armourer
Suggested Maximum number: 2
SKILL   
7
STAMINA  
10
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
Breastplate
Weapon:  
Ba8le Axe
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
In addition, if you do a8ack them you cannot return 
to this shop.
You are ambling along when you notice an intriguing 
doorway. Steps lead down from street level to a well 
made wooden door set in a cut stone wall. To either 
side of the door are small barred windows and above 
the door on the lintel is nailed a shield with the 
legend ‘Bogram’s Armour’ etched into it. The door is 
open so you decide to go down the steps and have a 
look inside. Peering around the doorway you see a 
small basement shop containing a number of pieces 
of armour (firmly a8ached to the walls) and a 
wooden counter going across the middle of the room. 
Behind the counter sits a dwarf, caught in the act of 
munching on a meat pie. He has dark tanned skin, a 
very bushy red beard and the build of someone who 
spends a lot of time working metal, though he looks 
friendly enough. Behind him are shelves stacked with 
a variety of types and pieces or armour and shields. 
What do you do? 
● You have no need of armour at the moment - you 
apologise for disturbing his dinner and move on. 
● You don’t need his goods but decide to talk to him 
anyway. Feigning an interest in a decorated shield, 
you strike up a conversation with him. Make an 
Etique8e skill roll. If you succeed, the dwarf engages 
in a long explanation of the local cave system and you 
gain +2 to your next Underground Lore skill roll. If 
you fail, the dwarf notices you aren’t going to buy 
anything and you end up leaving the shop. 
● You smirk to yourself as you realise what a treasure 
trove you have stumbled into with just one paltry 


--- PAGE 144 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
143
dwarf to protect it. As you move to a8ack the startled 
shopkeeper pulls a lever next to them and you hear a 
grinding noise - a large stone block is descending 
from the ceiling to seal off the entrance and trap you 
in here! Cursing you turn and dive back out of the 
shop before you are imprisoned with the laughter of 
Bogram chiding you out. You may not return to this 
shop and must remove it from the map.
In addition to the other options, you can ask the 
Armourer to do some work for you. He offers the 
following services. 
Service  
 
 
 
Cost  
Time
Buff and polish: The armourer will  5gp 
2 hours
knock out the dents and put a shine 
on your armour. The next Leadership 
skill roll you make gains a +1 bonus 
due to your immaculate a8ire. This 
will also repair any damage to your 
armour.
Trading: You can purchase or trade Core 
30 min
 any normal pieces of armour here,  rulebook
he has quite a stock. Don’t forget 
to make your Bargain skill rolls, if you 
wish to haggle.
Strengthen: This skilled armourer  10gp 
3 hours
can examine your gear and work in 
some additional straps and links 
that will give it a temporary enhancement 
- your next 5 times you roll for 
armour protection you add +1 to the 
total to see how much damage your 
armour blocks. This will also repair 
any damage to your armour.
M14 Weaponsmith
Suggested Maximum number: 2
Weaponsmith  
Guard Dog
SKILL   
7 
 
 
6
STAMINA  
10 
 
 
8
Social Rank:  
6 
 
 
-
Armour:  
Chain Cuirass  
None
Weapon:  
Greataxe 
 
Large Bite
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
In addition, if you do a8ack them you cannot return 
to this shop for one week.
Blocking part of the road is a covered wagon, from 
which spill a variety of spears, swords, maces and so 
on. As you approach you see a large bald headed man 
bartering his wares with a couple of peasants. A 
guard dog - very large and fierce - sits to one side of 
the weaponsmith, keeping an eye on proceedings as 
if it were the true owner of this business. It looks as if 
you are going to have to pass close by in order to 
move along, so you decide to slow down and have a 
look at the goods. What do you do? 
● On second thoughts, your weapons are fine and the 
dog looks like it bites. You edge past them and carry 
on. 
● Take a look at the stock of weapons and see if you 
can wheedle some information from the trader. He 
has a lot of knowledge about who is buying what. 
Test your Etique8e, if you succeed you may roll on 
Table 8.4 Chaos Unleashed Rumours & Events and 
add +1 to your next Bargain skill roll. 
● Whilst he is distracted by some other customers, 
you could try and grab something. Make a Sleight of 
Hand special skill roll with a -2 penalty - the dog is 
watching you! If you succeed anyway, you may make 
off with a pilfered sword or mace. If you fail, the dog 
leaps and starts barking! You decide to flee before 
things get worse - move to your next location. You 
may not return to this shop for 2d6 days.


--- PAGE 145 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
144
In addition to the other options, you can ask the 
Weaponsmith to do some work for you. He offers the 
following services. 
Service  
 
 
 
Cost  
Time
Trading. You can purchase or  
Core 
30 min
trade any normal weapons here,  
rulebook
he has quite a stock. Don’t forget 
to make your Bargain skill rolls, if 
you wish to haggle.
Sharpen and rebalance - the   
5gp 
1 hour
weaponsmith will hone the edge 
of swords or rebalance your mace 
such that you gain +1 SKILL for 
your next 10 a8ack rolls in combat. 
This will also repair any damage to 
your weapons.
M15 Magical Curiosity Shop
Suggested Maximum number: 1
Shop owner 
 
Imp
SKILL   
4 
 
 
7
STAMINA  
10 
 
 
6
MAGIC 
5 (Magic Points 18) 
-
Social Rank:  
6 
 
 
-
Armour:  
None  
 
None
Weapon:  
Dagger 
 
Large Claw
Spells:   
She has a number of spells but will   
 
 
only use a form of teleport as  
 
 
 
described below.
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
In addition, if you do a8ack them you cannot return 
to this shop for a week.
Against a larger building and by the looks of it 
leaning heavily on it for support a cylindrical tower 
has been built. It is not large - only two storeys - but 
looks cosy rather than ramshackle. Around the base 
there are a number of clay pots with herbs growing in 
them, above the open doorway is a wooden sign 
stating simply ‘Many Curiosities’ and ‘Welcome’ and 
the faint whiff of pipe smoke is in the air. The room 
inside is well lit and close to the entrance you can see 
an older woman, in a well made woollen dress, sat on 
a wooden stool and holding a clay beaker in her lap. 
In her other hand is a book that she is studying 
intensely. The rest of the room holds a stairway 
leading both up and down and a large number of 
shelves, stands and boxes covered in a wide variety of 
strange objects - many books, but also animal horns, 
glassware, strange bits of sculpture and many other 
things. Even more peculiar, you think you caught 
sight of a large bat-like creature hopping from behind 
a rack of clothing and up onto a high shelf. What do 
you do? 
● The contents of this shop are weird, unusual and 
probably dangerous, you have no desire to get 
tangled up in this sort of thing. Move along to your 
next encounter. 


--- PAGE 146 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
145
● Jingling your coin purse to show you could be a 
customer, you engage the proprietor in conversation. 
She is quite happy to chat and the difficulty is sticking 
to one topic. Make a roll on Table 8.2 Winds of Magic 
Rumours & Events and test your Etique8e. If you 
succeed you have also learned something of the 
history of this se8lement and can add +2 to your next 
City Lore roll. 
● It’s possible that she has something in her stock that 
might be of particular use to you. You ask to have a 
look around and move around the shop carefully 
examining the different items. Make a Magic Lore 
skill roll. If you are successful you find an item  - pick 
one from the Adventurers guild stock list to purchase 
if you wish. You may only find one such item here 
each week, so make a note of it! 
● Stealing from a magician is only for the foolhardy, 
but that is not going to deter you. Entering the shop 
you make smalltalk whilst looking for an item to 
pilfer. Firstly, make an Evaluate skill test. If you 
succeed you have spo8ed something of value and can 
try and swipe it - make a Sleight of Hand skill roll. If 
you succeed you make off with a small item worth 
3d6gp. If you fail, her imp was watching you 
carefully and screeches out an alert! With a curse the 
magician recites a quick spell and disappears in a 
puff of smoke whilst the imp swoops into a8ack. So 
you must fight two rounds of combat as you head for 
the door and flee this location before the Watch 
arrives. You cannot return to this shop for one week. 
● A shopful of treasures guarded only by a 
defenceless woman? This is an opportunity! Looking 
around to make sure no one is paying a8ention you 
move into the shop, close the door behind you and 
move to a8ack. The magician lets out a scream, drops 
her book and drink and then disappears in a puff of 
smoke! Her Imp screeches and swoops to a8ack. 
Resolve the combat as usual. If you survive you can 
loot some items worth 4d6 gold pieces, but you 
realise that the sound of combat has been noticed. 
Roll on the Lawbreaker table. You cannot return to 
this shop. Remove it from your map and move on.
In addition to the other options, you can ask the 
Magician to do some work for you. She offers the 
following services. 
Service  
 
 
 
Cost  
Time
Trading. You can purchase or trade Core 
30min
spell components here, but stock  
rulebook
uncertain.  For each component you 
want to buy, roll d6. For the first 
component, it is available on 4-6. 
For the second, it is available on a 5-6. 
For the third it is only in stock on a 6. 
You can return once per day. Magical 
Sundries also have the same restriction.
Identify. The magician can look  
20gp 
1 hour
through her books and identify 
magical items that you bring to her. 
She will tell you what they are and 
how to activate them, if that is needed.
Training. The magician can instruct  50gp 
One day
you in the arts of Magic allowing you 
to learn both ‘MAGIC’ and the 
associated skills. A hero must also 
spend experience points in the normal 
way to gain points in MAGIC and 
MAGIC based skills.
Tome protection. For a small fee,  
20gp 
½ day
you can have your spellbook hardened 
against non-magical a8acks. It can be 
made immune to fire, cold, acid and 
lightning by application of a secret 
combination of oils and powdered crystals.
Magical Research. The magician  
10gp 
1 Day
Has a large store of books and 
extensive knowledge - you can pay 
her to do research for you. You may 
succeed on one Magic Lore test by 
using this service.  


--- PAGE 147 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
146
M16 Devious Trap
Suggested Maximum number: n/a as they disappear once 
triggered.
Whilst the city of Khare may be famous for its traps, 
it is not the only place on Titan where devious 
tricksters set their snares to catch the unwary. There 
are as many motivations for this as there are traps; 
some do it out of spite, some in the hope of profit and 
others create them simply because they can. 
Whatever the reason, coming across a trap can be a 
very unpleasant experience for an adventurer.
Special: Once the trap has been sprung (deliberately 
or accidentally) remove it from the map.
 You can choose to test against your Trap Knowledge 
skill instead of any listed for the specific trap. A 
success indicates that you have avoided the 
dangerous effects of the trap. You can make a second 
test against your Trap Knowledge skill in order to 
deactivate it. If you succeed in this roll you gain 1d6 
gold pieces worth of components, but if you fail this 
second roll you suffer the effects of the trap as your 
fumblings activate it. Once the trap is activated or 
disarmed, remove it from the map. You may also test 
your LUCK to avoid a trap, as usual.
Table 4.4.2 Traps
2d6 
Trap Description 
2 
Acid Bath: A part of the ground has been rigged to give way, sending you slithering down into an acid   
 
filled stone bath! You can test against your Climb skill with a -3 penalty (the sides are slippery) or plunge 
into the corrosive liquid and suffer 1d6 points of damage (no Dodge or armour). Each round test Climb 
 
skill at -3 to scrabble back out or suffer a further point of damage. When you get out, roll 1d6 for each   
 
piece of equipment you carry - on a roll of 1 the acid has destroyed it! Only magical items are immune to 
this. This well concealed trap imposes -2 on Trap Knowledge to spot it.
3 
Unstoppa-Ball: A neatly hidden pressure plate releases a heavy metal ball down a chute and straight into 
you! Test against your Dodge skill with a -3 penalty or take 3+1d6 points of damage and you are knocked 
down. The ball is worth 1d6 gp but occupies three equipment slots if you want to carry it. This trap is   
 
well made and using Trap Knowledge has a -2 penalty.
4 
Vortex of Magic: When activated by your presence a concealed rune unleashes a vortex of wild magic. 
You are teleported to a random location (roll or drop a dice onto your map to find out where if you are   
 
in a city or dungeon). The magic also mangles you for 1d6 points of damage which cannot be prevented 
 
with armour or Dodge skill. If you have the Second Sight skill you may test against it to spot the rune   
 
before it activates. If you a8empt to use Trap Knowledge you must take a -3 penalty due to the unusual 
 
nature of the trap.
5 
Poisoned Dart: A wicked person has secreted a spring loaded poisoned dart in a gap in the nearby 
stonework. If you spot it (by making an Awareness skill test) you are able to jump out of the way as the  
 
dart whips past you. If you fail the skill test, you are stung by the dart and suffer 3 points of STAMINA  
 
damage as the poison sets your body on fire.


--- PAGE 148 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
147
2d6 
Trap Description 
6 
Chaos Rune: A magic user has inscribed a dangerous rune trap in this area - test against your Second   
 
Sight skill. If you succeed, you notice its emanations and are able to move carefully past it. If you fail, the 
rune is triggered and you are drained of 1d6 MAGIC points. If you do not have magic points, you will   
 
feel a slight chilling but suffer no other effects.
7 
Pit Trap: Amazingly, someone has dug out a pit without anyone noticing their work. Maybe they did it 
 
at night. In any case, as the ground beneath you gives way, you must test your Jump skill. A success  
 
 
means you have leapt clear, failure means you drop a few feet onto ragged shards of rusty metal, taking 
1d6 points of STAMINA damage as a result. You may climb out relatively easily.
8 
Spore Bag: A pressure plate has been rigged here, which when activated punctures a concealed bag of   
 
noxious spores which fill this area with a choking cloud. Test against your Acrobatics skill. If you succeed 
you manage to dive and roll out of the cloud before you are affected, if you fail you take a lungful of  
 
 
spores and suffer a racking cough for the rest of the day - you have -1 penalty to your SKILL until you   
 
have rested overnight.
9 
Drop stone: Your movements see you blundering upon a tripwire which has released a large stone block 
from above you. Test your Dodge skill. If you succeed, you have quickly sidestepped the block and are   
 
unharmed (if dusty). If you fail, a hefty clunk onto your head leaves you reeling - suffer 1d6 points of   
 
STAMINA damage. If you wear a metal helmet, you take 1 point of damage.
10 
Spray of Acid: When touched a disguised lever sets off a spring loaded piston that shoots a spray of  
 
 
strong acid over you! Test your Acrobatics skill. If you succeed you manage to dive out of the way before 
the acid soaks you. If you fail, the burning liquid causes you 1 point of STAMINA damage and also  
 
 
degrades your armour. Your Armour rolls have a -1 penalty until you can pay a suitable merchant to  
 
 
repair it. 
11 
Spiked Stick: A spiked length of wood has been rigged with a tripwire to swing out and impale you. You 
may test against your Dodge skill to avoid it. It is a crude trap and causes only one point of damage.
12 
Broken Trap: Someone has already fallen victim to this trap - if you have Trap Knowledge you can  
 
 
scavenge 2d6 gp worth of machinery, otherwise you move carefully past.


--- PAGE 149 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
148
M17 Upwelling of Magic
Suggested Maximum number: 3 at any one time.
For those without the Second Sight skill, this spot will 
appear as a basically normal part of the se8lement - 
perhaps they will experience a slight tingling 
sensation or wondering why the light seems to be 
brighter - but to those who are magically inclined, it 
is clear that something interesting is happening here. 
Magical energy seems to be flowing from the ground 
in what appears to be a skyward reaching stream of 
scintillating lights. It is not clear what is causing this, 
but if you are inclined it is possible you could make 
use of this upwelling of magic, harvesting it to 
replenish your own reserves, though it may be risky. 
What do you do? 
● You push your hands into the stream and relax 
your mind, ignoring the looks you are ge8ing from 
passersby, as you try to a8une to the energy and 
redirect it into yourself. Make a test against your 
Magic Lore skill. If successful you can restore 1d6 
Magic points. If you fail, you suffer one point of 
STAMINA damage as the raw magical energy reacts 
to your interference by burning you! 
● This is a fascinating 
natural phenomenon, but 
for the time being you will 
ignore it and move on
Special: The upwelling of 
magic ‘contains’ 20 Magic 
points worth of energy. 
After that is depleted it will 
disappear. 
It 
will 
also 
disappear after one week, 
fading into nothingness.
M18 Magic Door
Suggested Maximum number: 4
Upon a section of wall, someone (or something?) has 
inscribed runes of power, creating a magical door 
that can move you instantaneously across the city. 
Heroes that have the Second Sight skill will 
automatically notice the door - it appears as a series 
of gently glowing runes in the shape of an arched 
entrance which seems to surround a slowing 
spinning vortex of shadows. Without this ability, you 
must make an Awareness skill test with a penalty of 
-4 to notice the subtle markings. If you fail to spot it, 
mark it on your map anyway. You may retake the test 
each time you pass through this location.
Finding the door doesn’t mean you understand how 
to use it. Test against Magic Lore skill to see if you can 
decipher the runes. If you fail the test, you may come 
back and try again once per week to see if you can 
‘open’ the portal. If you succeed you know how to 
activate the door, but not where it leads and to find 
out you must step through! 
Drop or roll a dice onto your map - the nearest 
location is where you ‘exit’ the door, into a quiet 
alleyway or corner where no one is 
surprised to see you pop into existence. 
The door is NOT two-way. After the 
first time you have used it successfully, 
make a note of where it ‘exits’ so you 
can use it again in the future.
Each time you use the door, there is a 
chance that the winds of magic will 
whip you away to an unexpected 
location. Roll 2d6 - on a result of 2 you 
appear outside the se8lement and 
should move to the nearest gate to re-
enter. On a result of 12 you appear in 
the city but in the wrong place - drop 
or roll a dice onto your map to see 
where it is.


--- PAGE 150 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
149
M19 Rogues Cubby
Suggested Maximum number: 5
In order to spot this feature you need to make an 
Awareness test with a -3 penalty. If you fail to spot it, 
mark it on your map anyway. You may retake the test 
each time you pass through this location.
If you succeed, you have noticed that part of a 
building has been carefully and subtly modified to 
create an alcove like hiding space, complete with 
holes set at just the right height to peek through. 
Judging by the cobwebs and dust the cubby is not 
often used and if your mission requires to watch or 
monitor an area, you can slide into the space and 
observe the se8lement gaining a +2 on your 
Awareness or Sneaking skill rolls for this location. 
However, each time you use the cubby you should 
roll a 1d6 - on the result of a 1 you have disturbed a 
Hobgoblin Spy (encounter C13) and must fight them!
M20 Crumbling Watchtower
Suggested Maximum number: 3
In ages past, perhaps as part of an older city wall, a 
watchtower was built here. It has largely been built 
onto and incorporated into other newer structures, 
but parts of it still remain including the stone stairs 
and eyrie (the roof has disappeared completely). You 
could, if you wish, climb up and use it to observe the 
nearby streets though it probably isn’t entirely safe. If 
you want to ascend, you must pass a Climb skill test 
with a +3 bonus (failure means you can’t find a way 
to get up). At the top, you can survey the area and 
gain a +2 on your next City Lore, Awareness or 
Hunting roll. If you do this roll a 1d6 - on the result of 
a 1, part of the tower crumbles under your weight 
and you must test against your Jump skill or suffer 
1d6 points of STAMINA damage as you plummet to 
the ground in a cloud of masonry. If this happens 
remove the Crumbling Watchtower from your map, 
as it is now too damaged to be used as a lookout 
position.
M21 Forgo=en Stash
Suggested Maximum number: Disappears when found, so 
no maximum
Caught in a daydream, you are surprised to find 
yourself staring at a small pile of masonry and old 
timber wedged into the corner of a nearby building. 
Tilting your head from side to side you realise that 
there is something - a leather bag perhaps - hidden 
underneath. It is clear from the cobwebs and weeds 
that stretch across the pile that it has been concealed 
for some time. 
After a quick check to make sure no one is watching, 
you delve in and drag out the container...but what 
does it contain?
Roll a 1d6 to see what you have found: 
1 = nothing, the bag is empty
2 = roll once on Everyday Items treasure table,
3-4 = coins worth 3d6gp in total
5-6 = coins worth 5d6gp in total.


--- PAGE 151 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
150
M22 Sorcerer’s Wyrd
Suggested Maximum number: 1
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
12
MAGIC 
4 (Inner Strength 8)
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
None (Dodge 4)
Weapon:  
Dagger
Spells:   
Tym Po Nang will use FOG to obscure 
himself then ZIP and ZEN to escape.
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
A8ached to the corner of a larger structure is the 
strangest li8le building you have ever seen. Although 
clearly made of brick, tile and wood in appearance it 
would seem to have grown onto it’s neighbour like 
tumour or parasite. There are no straight lines or logic 
to its construction except that the door is, as usual, 
next to the ground. For all that it does not feel 
threatening or dangerous, more like the prank of an 
unhinged architect. You move closer to get a be8er 
look and now you can see inside - there is a fireplace, 
shelves full of intriguing knick-knacks, a table and 
chairs in one of which sits a bright eyed elf that is 
spinning an orb of light in his hand. He sees you and 
beckons you over.  What do you do? 
● This is too strange for you. Move along to your next 
encounter. 
● Approach  the elf and greet him. He explains that 
his name is Tym Po Nang and he is a travelling 
sorcerer. He has set up his ‘shop’ here (with full 
permission he is at pains to add) in order to trade and 
to teach. It’s rare to meet an elf or a sorcerer and you 
stop to have a chat with him. Make a roll on Table 8.2 
Winds of Magic Rumours & Events and make an 
Etique8e skill test. If you succeed you draw him into 
a conversation about the se8lement and you can add 
+2 to your next City Lore roll. 
● Nodding and greeting the elf you come into the 
building and your eyes light up at the possibilities for 
larceny. You may try to pinch something - make a test 
against Sleight of Hand as an opposed roll against the 
sorcerer, who has Awareness skill of 8. If you succeed 
you have pilfered a spell component worth 3d6 gp. If 
you fail, Tym Po Nang notices and with a snarl blasts 
you with a spell of his own devising - you disappear 
from this location and reappear at the Jail location. 
You must roll on the Lawbreaker table immediately, 
and may not revisit the sorcerers home for a month.
In addition to the other options, you can ask Tym Po 
Nang to help you out in some way - he offers the 
following services.
Service  
 
 
 
Cost  
Time
Trading. You can purchase or  
Core 
30min
trade sorcery spell components  
rulebook
here, but stock is very limited and 
uncertain. For each spell component 
you want to buy, roll 1d6. For the 
first component, it is available on 
4,5 or 6. For the second component 
it is available on a 5 or 6. For the 
third it is only on stock if you roll a 6. 
You can return once per day to try again.
Identify. The sorcerer can look  
20gp 
1 hour
through his books and identify 
magical items - he will tell you what 
they are and how to activate them, 
if that is needed.
Training. The Sorcerer can instruct  50gp 
1 day
you in the arts of Magic allowing 
you to learn both ‘MAGIC’ and the 
associated skills. A hero must also 
spend experience points in the 
normal way to gain points in 
MAGIC and MAGIC based skills 
(such as MAGIC-Sorcery).


--- PAGE 152 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
151
M23 Alchemist’s Workshop
Suggested Maximum Number: 2
SKILL   
5
STAMINA  
12
Social Rank:  
6
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk
Weapon:  
Club and Acid Vials
(These can be thrown for 1d6 points of damage if they 
hit.)
A8acking this person is an Unlawful Action.
You smell this building before you see it. A sharp 
smell causes you to sneeze and leaves your throat 
feeling scorched, as you pull up your cloak to cover 
your mouth and nose you spot a low wooden framed 
building with what appear to be scorch marks do8ed 
across its walls. The smell is coming from a bright 
green liquid that appears to have just been emptied 
out of a window and is seeping into the mud of the 
sidewalk. The person who slopped it out is a round-
faced man, noticeably missing his eyebrows and most 
of his hair, who gives you a cheery wave as you pass 
by. You can see inside the building there are racks of 
vials and ceramic pots and, surprisingly, a large 
selection of herbs neatly po8ed up and dangling from 
a trellis. What do you do? 
● You’ve no need of a potion or salve today, so you 
nod to the man and move on. 
● Moving over you stop and talk to the alchemist. He 
is friendly but strange - too much time inhaling fumes 
has left him with a wandering mind. After an hour 
talking to him you can add +1 to your next Lore roll 
(any type of Lore except City Lore). 
● Alchemists often have a secret stock. Make a test 
against either your Bribery or Con skill, to convince 
him to bring it out. If you succeed you can purchase 
a vial of acid (10gp, does 1d6 points of damage to one 
target and 1d3 points to all those adjacent to the 
target, use Thrown skill to use) or a vial of poison 
(20gp, increase weapon damage by 2 for one combat 
or coats 10 bolts or arrows to the same effect). If you 
fail the Bribery or Con test, he is very offended by 
your enquiries and asks you to leave. You can only 
access the special stock once a day. 
● Stealing from a shop which is partly on fire and 
partly dissolving in acid seems risky but you decide 
to give it a go. Make a Sleight of Hand test opposed 
by the alchemist’s Awareness skill of 7. If you succeed 
you gain herbs worth 2d6 gp. If you fail, he spots you 
and gives you one chance to leave before he starts 
throwing acid - an offer you accept. You cannot 
return here for a week.
In addition to the other options, the Alchemist offers 
a few services
Service  
 
 
 
Cost  
Time
Trading. You can purchase or  
Core 
30min
trade herbs here, but stock is   
rulebook
limited and uncertain. For each herb 
you want to buy, roll 1d6. For the 
first one, it is available on a 3-6. 
For the second component it is 
available on a 4-6. For the third or 
more it is only on stock if you roll 
a 5 or 6. You can return once per day.
Medicine. If you are suffering  
5gp 
1 hour
from a disease or poison you can 
ask the alchemist to prepare a 
treatment, which will come in the 
form of a cup of oily liquid to be 
gulped down in one go. Roll to see 
what happens: 1-4: It worked! You 
are cured. 5: It didn’t work, but 
there are no side effects. 6: It didn’t 
work and you feel terrible - you suffer 
-1 penalty to all skill tests until you’ve 
had a chance to sleep it off.


--- PAGE 153 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
152
M24 Place of Execution
Suggested Maximum number: 2
A fearsome sight greets your eyes. At the centre of a 
small drab square there is a raised wooden platform 
upon which there are gallows and a large wooden 
block, the top and sides of which are darkly stained. 
A chill runs through you as you realise that this must 
be the place where public executions happen. The 
square is quiet at the moment apart from the usual to 
and fro of everyday business, but before you carry on 
you take a moment to pray that you never end up as 
the entertainment here.
Special: Roll 2d6. On the result of a 2 or 3, you have 
arrived just as an execution is taking place. Instead of 
a quiet square, it is filled to the brim with jeering 
townsfolk as the condemned is being led up to the 
block for beheading. There is li8le you can do about 
it - the large crowd is clearly excited by the spectacle 
and there are a number of Watchmen present keeping 
order. Your choice is straightforward - you can turn 
away and carry on with your travels or stay and 
watch the axe fall. Either way, deduct one point of 
LUCK for witnessing this grim spectacle.
M25 Ta=oo Parlour
Suggested Maximum number: 2
A brightly coloured awning has been a8ached to the 
front of a house under which sits a woman wearing a 
long brown sleeveless dress covered by a black 
leather apron. She sits on a stool; to one side of her is 
a table with a large collection of vials and stoppered 
bo8les and on the other side is a large reclining chair. 
Behind, on the front wall of the house, is a selection of 
wooden panels that have been painted in gaudy 
designs - snakes wrapped around skulls, dancing 
ladies and so on. In her hand she holds a shiny metal 
needle. As you pass by she gestures to you, inviting 
you to become her next customer. What do you do? 
● Nod back and hurry on, you’ve no desire to get 
inked today. 
● Go over and select a design for a ta8oo - it costs 2gp 
for a small ta8oo, which is permanent, of a design of 
your choosing. Make a note on your character sheet 
as to the nature and location of your ta8oo. It takes 
one hour to complete the work. 
● Inquire about any special services - if you have the 
AFF Heroes Companion, you can ask for Magical 
Ta8ooing. Use the rules described there. 
●  A8empt to steal a bo8le of ink - make a sleight of 
hand skill roll. If you succeed you have acquired a 
vial of coloured ink (worth 4gp). If you fail, you have 
been spo8ed and should leave to a new location 
before the Watch can be called! You cannot return to 
this shop for a week.


--- PAGE 154 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
153
M26 Workshop
Suggested Maximum number: 3 per location
A huge number of trades are carried out within the 
city, though most of them are of no interest to a Hero. 
Still, it may be that you come across such places as 
you explore the city and you may want to make a 
note of where they are and the trade they are carrying 
out. 
Small workshops are very numerous - often a 
workshop is the lower floor of a house or a side 
building, with goods being either sold directly onto 
the street or sent to the marketplace and you can 
come across a place of trade like this in almost every 
part of the city, thus the maximum number is given 
per location rather than for the se8lement as a whole. 
Roll twice to see what kind of trade is carried out - 
roll once for the category and again to see what 
activity is going on.
1d6 
1-2 Food 
3-4 Craft 
5-6 Everyday
1 
Butcher 
Tinker  
Weaver
2 
Baker  
Carpenter 
Cobbler
3 
Pres. foods 
Stonemason 
Po8er
4 
Brewer 
Jeweller 
Laundry
5 
Spice Trader Carpenter 
Leatherworker
6 
Wine Trader Classroom 
Herbalist
 The workshops may sell directly to customers or not: 
If you wish to trade with them, make a test against 
your Bargain skill. If you succeed they are willing to 
sell you appropriate goods (use the prices as listed in 
the main AFF rulebook) but they won’t buy goods 
from you. 
All of the items sold by these workshops can usually 
be found in the marketplace.
M27 Bathhouse
Suggested Maximum number: 3
A soft tinkling of water draws your gaze towards a 
well made building, the lower floor of which is 
fronted with carved stone reliefs showing scenes of 
water nymphs, fountains and pools of gently rippling 
water. To either side of the door are carved sea 
serpents from the mouths of which pour steady 
streams of water, falling into bowls held in their tails. 
There are no windows on the street front, but there 
are some grills carved into the stone from which 
wisps of steam are escaping. The door is open and 
inside you see a towel carrying a8endant, waiting to 
take your money. The bathhouse offers you a chance 
to relax and clean up after your hard day of 
adventuring!
Here you can obtain the following services: Laundry 
- your clothes taken and cleaned, 1gp, takes two 
hours. A dip in the communal bath - warm water 
(either from hot springs or heated by wood stoves) 
will ease your muscles, restoring one point of 
STAMINA - 2gp. A private room with its own bath 
(fresh water) and a massage - also restores one point 
of STAMINA and costs 5gp.
M28 Stables
Suggested Maximum number: 5
The smell of manure and whinnying of horses tells 
you that there is a stableyard nearby. Looking around 
you can see an open set of gates through which you 
spy a number of stable lads a8ending to horses whilst 
a farrier works on re-shoeing one of them. This seems 
to be a well organised and respectable stable, which 
you could make use of. A young woman  notices  
your interest and comes over to greet you, asking 
what manner of help you are after.
You can stable a horse here (1gp/day) or purchase any 
items related to owning or caring for your steeds, 
including purchasing a horse. See the AFF Rulebook 
for prices.


--- PAGE 155 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
154
M29 Auction House
Suggested Maximum number: 2
The sound of an auctioneer in full flow, chanting out 
the bids, alerts you to the existence of an auction 
house nearby. 
It is an extravagant building, just an open space with 
a canvas roof held up by wooden poles under which 
an auctioneer stands on a raised platform, calling out 
the bids on a variety of items. To one side of him is the 
stock, available for inspection. It is a mix of everyday 
items and animals, seemingly assembled at random.
The auction appears to be public and you can a8end 
if you want, either to buy or sell - they will auction 
anything up to the value of 50gp on your behalf and 
you can buy anything listed under ‘Clothing’, 
‘Transport’, ‘Livestock’ or ‘General Equipment’ plus 
one Sorcery spell component.
In order to take part, make five tests of your Bargain 
or Evaluate skill and record how many successes you 
get. 1-2 Successes - items cost double, or sell for half 
value. 3 Successes: You buy and sell at listed prices. 
4-5 Successes - items cost one quarter less than usual 
and you sell for a quarter more than the listed price.
The auction is not available everyday. If you come 
back to this location, roll 1d6 - the auction is in 
progress if you roll a 5 or 6 (only roll once per day).
M30 Shady Dealer
Suggested Maximum number: 2
You have stopped for a moment to consider your next 
move. Whilst catching your breath and looking 
around you notice someone coming out of a nearby 
building in a furtive and suspicious manner, piquing 
your interest. Next to a painted but dirty and 
damaged wooden door you can see there is a 
shu8ered window. The shu8ers are closed but they 
are not of great quality and you can just about make 
out a lamplit parlour inside, which seems to be some 
kind of shop. As you watch a person approaches the 
door and knocks in a highly unusual fashion. After a 
moment you hear bolts clicking back and the door is 
briefly opened and shut and bolted again once this 
new customer has entered.
If you wish to, you can approach and try to gain 
entrance. You must test against your Secret Signs skill 
to mimic the knock you heard. If you fail the test, you 
see someone come close to the damaged shu8er 
before a curtain is pulled over the window, 
concealing everything inside, and the door remains 
locked to you. You can try again the next day.
If you succeed in the Secret Signs skill test the door is 
opened and an older man with a long dark beard 
ushers you into his emporium. Judging by the 
manner of strange and expensive items, this is some 
sort of dealer in unusual items.
Here you can buy items from the Sorcery Spell 
Components and Magical Sundries sections of the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy price list, but at twice the 
normal listed price. On any day that you visit, 1d6 
items are available.
The Shady Dealer is not always open - if you return, 
roll 1d6. They are open for business on a 1 or 2.


--- PAGE 156 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
155
4.5 Se=lement Details Sheet
As you create and map out your se8lements, you 
should keep a track of what they contain and other 
useful details such as the name, origin etc. This does 
not have to be done for every place that you come 
across, but it is worth keeping a track of the basics 
(name, reason for existence, dominant type of people) 
to help you build up a map of the world.
These sheets are an example of how you might do 
that. We have taken the city of Ludria, which is not 
intended to be a specific place within Titan (though 
you can use it as such) but simply an example of how 
you can build up and describe a se8lement.
Table 4.5.1 Se=lement Details and Description
Detail  
 
 
Chapter 
Description
Type  
 
 
4.1 
 
City
Name  
 
 
4.1 
 
Ludria
Origin  
 
 
4.1 
 
Human
Reason for Existence  
4.1 
 
Natural Feature: The city is located where the river Lud empties 
into the Silver Sea
Current Occupation  
4.1 
 
Mixed - mostly human but with a good number of dwarves and 
elves.
Map Generation 
 
4.1 
 
Dice drop + filled in by hand
Locations 
 
 
4.1 
 
36
Morality: Neutral 
 
7.1 
 
All gods may be worshipped here
Control: Weak  
 
7.1 
 
+2 to rolls on the Lawbreaker table, minimum result of 4.
Gods: Neutral  
 
7.1 
 
Main temple is dedicated to a neutral god, though other places of 
worship exist
Looking at the results and the location we decide that 
Ludria is a busy port city that is most concerned with 
trade and commerce. To round it out a bit further we 
give Ludria a pair of rulers - Lord Venip and Lady 
Griselda Bloth who are interested mostly in money 
and gossip, leaving the city to run itself with the 
minimum of oversight. This is a busy and dangerous 
place with lots going on and not much law 
enforcement or religious fervour to stop any 
criminals who want to operate here.
Individual Locations
As you explore your se8lement you can give names 
and further descriptions to the locations you find. As 
you discover more details about each location, by 
having ‘Map Encounters’ you can add them in and 
build up a fuller picture of what this se8lement 
contains. We have included a few example map 
encounters for each location, you should feel free to 
replace them or add more if you want to use this city 
as part of your game. In addition we have numbered 
each location so you can find one randomly by rolling 
1d6,1d6 to get a set of ‘coordinates’ (e.g. 4,4 is ST3 - 
Streets 3, ‘The Hill’).
You don’t need to do this for every se8lement you 
encounter in your travels, but if you intend to return 
to one on a regular basis it is worth keeping a note of 
what you have found as this will save you having to 
rebuild your map and provide you with ideas for 
encounters and missions.


--- PAGE 157 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
156
Table 4.5.2 City of Ludria Location Details
Location 
 
Description 
 
 
 
 
 
Example Map
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Encounters
1,1
1,1
1,2
1,3
1,4
1,5
1,6
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
CG1 - City Gate 1, 
‘The King’s Gate’
CG2 - City Gate 2, 
‘The North Gate’
CG3 - City Gate 3 
‘The Orchard Gate’
CG4 - City Gate 4 
‘The Pig Gate’
CG5 - City Gate 5, 
‘The Swamp Gate’
CO - College, ‘The 
House of Hamaskis’
GY1 - Graveyard 1, 
The Lord’s Rest
GY2 - Graveyard 2, 
The Paupers Pit
HO - Hospital, 
‘House of Respite’
DD1 - Drinking Den 
1, ‘The Broom & 
Bucket’
Stables, Crumbling 
Watchtower
General Goods Kiosk, 
Abandoned Shack
Shady Dealer, 
Crumbling watchtower
Stables, Smithy
Rogues Cubby, Magic 
Door
Sorcerers Wyrd, 
Magical Curiosity Shop, 
Alchemist’s Laboratory
Quiet Fishing Spot, 
Shrine, Devious Trap
Place of Execution, 
Collapsing Ground, 
Devious Trap
Shrine, Alchemist’s 
Laboratory, Bathhouse
Workshop, Latrine
Known as ‘The King’s Gate’ as the road from 
here leads towards the capital city.
Simply the most northerly gate of the city, tracks 
lead towards the forest.
Traditionally a large number of orchards were 
located just to the east of Ludria.
Used by many farmers particularly those 
bringing livestock into the city for sale.
A track leads from here to the swamps west of 
Ludria.
As a major city in the region, Ludria is home to 
many scholars, sages, wizards and sorcerers. 
They have gathered in one part of the city to 
share their knowledge.
This large graveyard by the river is favoured by 
the wealthy citizens of Ludria, it has many large 
and well appointed tombs. Sometimes the dead 
get restless.
The graveyard of the poor, this contains many 
mass graves and pits where those that die in 
poverty are deposited.
Disease and injury are a constant menace in Titan 
and the House of Respite, staffed by monks, 
physicians and herbalists offers help to those that 
cannot find help at the temples.
After a day spent working in the great market 
many peasants come for a drink here, there is 
often musicians and dancing.


--- PAGE 158 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
157
2,5
2,6
3,1
3,2
3,3
3,4
3,5
3,6
4,1
4,2
DD2 - Drinking Den 
2, ‘The Pickled Dog’
DD3 - Drinking Den 
3, ‘The Hole in The 
Wall’
TA1 - Tavern 1, ‘The 
Troll’s Head’
TA2 - Tavern 2, ‘The 
Thresher’
IN1 - Inn 1, ‘The 
Mighty Elk’
IN2 - Inn 2, ‘The 
Fair Measure’
SA1 - Slum Alleys 1, 
‘Choke Alley’
SA2 - Slum Alleys 2, 
‘Bog Street’
SA3 - Slum Alleys 3, 
‘The Slumps’
ST1 - Streets 1,’The 
Old Bridges’
Ta8oo Parlour, Shady 
Dealer
Latrine, Abandoned 
Shack
Smithy, Armourer
Auction House, 
Workshop
Workshop, Forgo8en 
Cellar
Magic Door, Latrine
Workshop, Devious 
Trap
Shady Dealer, Rogues 
Cubby
Abandoned Shack, 
Collapsing Ground
Quiet Crossroads, 
Forgo8en Cellar
This foul smelling drinking pit is noted for 
having a large specimen jar containing the 
remains of an animal floating in cloudy liquid all 
suspended in chains by the door.
Hard up against the city wall, ‘The Hole’ is a 
favoured spot for the Watch to drink, making it 
slightly less dangerous than other cheap bars.
Run by and favoured by dwarves this stone built 
tavern has as its sign a large, horridly ugly, troll's 
head hanging above the door. The nearby city 
gate is used by the guards and is not open to the 
public (or heroes).
Overlooking the sea this nautically themed 
tavern has a number of Sharks jaws decorating 
the walls.
Run by Agatha Skovland (Big Squeeze) a woman 
from the north lands, known for her hearty meals 
and strong ale.
A decent enough watering hole, kept clean & 
tidy by the Bramby family.
A place of many workshops connected to the 
market place, known for its tendency to burn 
down with surprising regularity.
This area of low ground is prone to flooding by 
the river and some of the shacks are on stilts. It is 
a haven for smugglers.
Once an a8ractive part of the city with a busy 
dockside, a great wave levelled many of the 
houses and reduced the docks to rubble. It has 
never really recovered.
Said to be the oldest part of Ludria this quieter 
part of the city borders both the river and the 
park. 


--- PAGE 159 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
158
4,3
4,4
4,5
4,6
5,1
5,2
5,3
5,4
ST2 - Streets 2, ‘Oat 
Street’
ST3 - Streets 3, ‘The 
Hill’
WS1 - Wealthy 
Streets 1, ‘Bloth’s 
Ridge’
WS2 - Wealthy 
Streets 2, ‘The Silver 
Streets’
TH1 - Theatre 1, 
‘The Red House’’
TH1 - Theatre 2, 
‘Harlequin Street’
TE1 - Temple 1, 
‘The Sailors Temple’
TE2 - Temple 2, 
‘The Lord’s Temple’
Auction House, 
Weaponsmith
General Goods Kiosk, 
Workshop
Magic Door, Rogues 
Cubby, Stables
Magical Curiosity Shop, 
Quiet Crossroads, 
Rogues Cubby
Shrine, Stables
Ta8oo Parlour, Burnt 
Out House
General Goods Kiosk, 
Forgo8en Cellar
Stables, Bathhouse
A small area of decent housing owned mostly by 
merchants and farmers.
A raised mound overlooking the poorer parts 
around it, many who live here have made a 
living from the sea. A regular ferry connects it to 
the docks.
A ridge of land that is home to some of the 
wealthiest nobles and merchants that make their 
home in Ludria including the home of Venip 
Bloth, Lord of Ludria.
Between the docks and the grand market, the 
silver streets are the home of many merchants 
and artisans that have made their fortunes in 
Ludria.
A large stone and wood building, painted gaudy 
red, dominates this area. This theatre serves up 
entertainment for the upper classes and wealthy 
merchants.
A wide street holds several places to eat, drink 
and be entertained, particularly ‘The Jangles’ 
which is a raucous street of entertainment halls 
showing a variety of acts - singers, dancers, 
acrobats, comedians and so on.
Dedicated to Solinthar, Hydana, Sukh and 
Pangara this temple is visited frequently by 
mariners and merchants, hoping for a safe 
passage across the waters.
Dedicated to Aqualis (on account of the wealth 
that 
comes 
down 
the 
river) 
and 
Libra 
(maintaining order) this well maintained temple 
next to the keep is where important services 
relating to the nobility are held.


--- PAGE 160 ---

Chapter 4 - Se=lements
159
5,5
5,6
6,1
6,2
6,3
6,4
6,5
6,6
TE3 - Temple 3 ‘The 
Farmers Shrines’
MP1 - Market Place 
1, The Great Market
MP2 - Market Place 
2, The Fayre
DO - Docks
KE - Keep
JA - Jail
PA - Park
GH - Garbage Heap
Shrine, Small Well
Alchemist’s Laboratory, 
Weaponsmith, 
Armourer
Magical Curiosity Shop, 
Auction House, 
Workshop
Cartographer’s Shop, 
Ta8oo Parlour
Armourer, 
Weaponsmith
Place of Execution, 
Shrine
Small Well, Bathhouse
Collapsing Ground, 
Crumbling Watchtower
A series of temples dedicated to many gods but 
mostly Galana, Glantanka and Fulkra this district 
is where many farmers and travellers come to 
make their observances.
A large open square ringed with shops, the main 
marketplace of Ludria is busy almost everyday 
with stalls, hawkers and shops selling all manner 
of goods.
A maze of narrow streets lined with shops and 
stalls, popular as a place to wander and browse 
the goods on offer.
As a port city the docks are the most important 
district in Ludria and as such they have their own 
palisade wall and watch-house. Sailors, workers 
and goods move in and out continuously. As 
well as the ships and boats a ferry service crosses 
from here to ‘The Hill’ for a 1gp fee.
The highest point in Ludria perched on a spur of 
hard rock the Ludria Keep is home to Lord Bloth 
and his family and retainers. Rumour has it that 
beneath the keep lies a terrible dungeon full of 
traps and monsters. Soldiers and Watchmen 
patrol here endlessly.
A brief cart ride from the Keep lies the Jail, 
located on Gibbet Street. Woe betide anyone 
unfortunate enough to find themselves locked in 
its rat infested cells.
Used for a variety of purposes such as sporting 
contests or circuses, the citizens of Ludria like to 
come here to relax and socialise. A large entrance 
gate opens onto ‘The Fayre’.
Once a slum, this area was condemned after an 
outbreak of plague and has descended even 
further into ruin; it is now used as a place where 
all manner of filth is disposed of.


--- PAGE 161 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
160
Keeping notes like these for any major se8lement that 
you intend to visit regularly will help you build up a 
feeling for what it contains and what sorts of goods 
and services are available there. For se8lements you 
only visit once or sparingly you can simply make a 
note of the important features such as name, current 
occupation and a couple of significant locations.
For example, some distance from Ludria we come to a 
small dwarven mining community located in the 
foothills of a mountain range. 
The extent to which you keep notes is up to you, but 
in the long run it is generally faster and easier to keep 
some track of your se8lements as you pass through 
them, rather than having to recreate them each time 
you need to use them. In addition, creating a detailed 
se8lement can also help to inspire you to plan out new 
adventures for your heroes.
Table 4.5.3 Se=lement Summary Description - Concise Version
Detail  
 
 
Chapter 
Description
Type  
 
 
4.1 
 
Town
Name  
 
 
4.1 
 
Lower Klag
Current Occupation  
4.1 
 
Mostly Dwarven
Notable Locations 
 
4.1 
 
Lower Klag has a marketplace (not open every day), Tavern (The 
Miner’s Pick) and Temple to Throff (Kerillim as the dwarves know 
her).
Other  
 
 
7.1 
 
Lower Klag is a typically well ordered dwarven se8lement


--- PAGE 162 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
161
A core part of any good fantasy campaign is the 
dungeon. Whether it be an ancient tomb, filled with 
undead or a great cave system taken over by orcs and 
goblins, the opportunity to light the torches and creep 
through the darkness in search of treasure is a 
challenge for every hero. In this section we lay out the 
means for quickly constructing interesting and 
unpredictable 
dungeons 
for 
your 
adventures, 
covering building a dungeon map, filling it with 
monsters 
and 
challenges 
and 
some 
general 
suggestions and ideas about dungeoneering.
The most important thing to remember is that the 
suggestions in this chapter are optional - if you don’t 
want to worry about the conditions of a dungeon, or 
you have already decided that every room will have 
a locked door you should proceed accordingly and 
use this chapter to fill in the details that you haven’t 
yet come up with.
Dungeon vs Section
In this part of the book we will refer to the entire 
structure, all the rooms and corridors together as a 
dungeon, with parts of it being separately generated 
as ‘sections’. Sections have a limited number of rooms 
and all follow the same theme - so if you determine a 
section of the dungeon is ‘slimy’ (see the Dungeon 
Conditions table) then all the parts of that section are 
slimy. However, other sections of the dungeon might 
have other conditions a8ached to them.
Some rolls are made for the dungeon as a whole and 
some are made separately for each section - this helps 
to keep the heroes guessing as they progress through 
the darkness.
Dungeon Size
All heroes love exploring a huge labyrinth of horrors, 
don’t they? However, such expeditions can easily 
become overwhelming. In order to avoid this, we 
divide our dungeons into smaller sections, to allow 
adventurers the chance to rest, recuperate or turn 
back. Each section can be as large as you like but we 
suggest the following. For a relatively easy dungeon, 
for heroes who are still a bit fresh behind the ears, 
include 6+1d6 rooms in each section. For more 
seasoned heroes the section can be 6+3d6 rooms and 
for glorious champions confident of their abilities 
each section is 12+ 3d6 rooms long. The importance of 
dividing the dungeon into sections is that each part 
should contain some clue, object or person that helps 
them advance their overall quest. If the hero needs to 
collect, for example, the six rubies needed to form the 
sceptre of blood, your dungeon will need to be 
divided into six sections. Additional sections should 
be added to house important individuals such as the 
dungeon master (the boss of this dungeon) or an 
opponent if you are using the mission system.
It is recommended that each section is mapped out 
separately, in order to stop your dungeon map 
becoming unmanageable. The first section should 
start with the dungeon entrance and the final room 
should be the transition room (see below) indicating 
the finish of that section. 
For a dungeon with many sections, the transition 
room could lead into multiple new sections.
What sort of dungeon is it?
Not all dungeons are nicely chiselled mines lit by 
regularly refreshed torches! In fact, most of them will 
be weird or unusual in some way, explaining why 
they have ended up as terrible dungeons (instead of 
being inhabited by someone more civilised). Use the 
following tables to find out who made the dungeon, 
what sort of shape the structure is in and how the 
5 - DUNGEONS


--- PAGE 163 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
162
creatures are faring. This will give you a great outline 
of what sort of dungeon you are facing. You can roll 
for these conditions once for the entire dungeon or 
separately for each section, depending on how varied 
and complex you want your dungeon to be.
Dungeon Origin - gives you an insight as to how this 
place came into existence. Recommended to roll once 
only as all parts of a dungeon are probably part of a 
single structure, but you can roll separately for each 
section and build a series of interlinked structures if 
you wish.
Dungeon Condition - rooms left long underground can 
become flooded, or filled with vegetation...they are 
not all left in a pristine condition!
Creature Condition - just as with a town, you can find 
some dungeons where the creatures have prospered 
and some where they are not doing well.
Table 5.1 Dungeon Origin - 
roll once for the entire Dungeon. All sections are assumed to be part of the same overall structure.
2d6 
Origin
2 
Cellars - This was once a cellar or basement of a great house that has been long abandoned and fallen   
 
into disrepair. The environment was built for people but it is also li8ered with the rubbish and detritus, 
 
such as broken bits of furniture, that got shoved down here before it was forgo8en. The entranceway will 
be a trapdoor or steps leading down from the ruins of the building it once belonged to. Typical rooms   
 
will be regular, thick walled and low, with size based on their former contents.
3 
Sewer - This was once part of the sewerage system and for all you know, it might still be connected in   
 
places. A nasty miasma fills the air and the squeaking of rats can be heard in the darkness. The floor is a 
 
mixture of mud and slime - remember to clean your boots later. The entrance is an opening into the pipes 
where part of the works has collapsed or been smashed into. Typical rooms will be points where pipes   
 
widen or meet and the corridors are straight, round and filled with filthy sludge.
4 
Crypt - this was once a religious place used to house the remains of the dead. Tomb raiders have visited 
and the once carefully organised tombs have been broken into and pillaged. As you step forward you can 
feel bones crunching underfoot. The entrance is, by tradition, through either an ancient vine strewn 
mausoleum or an open grave. As this is not intended to be a place for the living, rooms and corridors will 
tend to be tight, narrow spaces, often decorated with images of death and containing shelves or nooks 
for coffins.
5 
Lair - this place has been excavated by some creature or group of animals as a home. Looking at the huge 
claw marks on the walls, you can’t help wondering if they are still about…. The entrance is an opening   
 
strewn with bones and droppings. The rooms and corridors will be carved out by claws, teeth and horns 
so they are rounded and smoothed down by passing feet and bodies.
6 
Cave - You have stumbled into part of a natural cave system, which has been built over as the city grew 
 
or gone unnoticed in the wilds. The tunnels and rooms are unworked and there are places where you   
 
have to squeeze through narrow gaps to move forward. The entrance is a simple opening in a natural   
 
rock formation. Typical rooms will be oddly shaped with uneven floors and ceilings. Tunnels wind and 
 
vary in width and may be difficult to squeeze along.


--- PAGE 164 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
163
7 
Dungeon - these rooms and corridors were constructed as part of a larger building, possibly for the  
 
 
purpose of imprisoning people. The rooms are small and rough with the rusted remains of chains  
 
 
decorating the walls. The entrance is steps or a ramp leading down from the ruins of the building it once 
served. Typical rooms will be cells or guard rooms. There may be larger interrogation rooms, though this 
was not a place intended for visitors. Rooms and corridors are not elegant but are well made and tough.
8 
Dwarven Halls / Mines - Long abandoned, this was once the home to a clan of dwarves. It has been  
 
 
carved from the rock with great care and enormous skill. The corridors and chambers are neatly shaped 
 
and arranged, there are runes and decorations worked into many surfaces. The entrance is through a  
 
 
grand set of stone doors. Of all those that delve beneath the earth, the dwarves do it most skilfully.  
 
 
Rooms and corridors can be of any size and shape, but they will all display the workmanship and  
 
 
imagination of the master craftsmen that created them.
9 
Buried buildings / Ruins - this was once a town, or at least part of it, that must have been buried in some 
great cataclysm or the passing of the eons. Narrow Streets are now corridors and houses have become   
 
caverns. The dusty and ro8ed remains of abandoned items li8er the floor along with huge boulders and 
dirt that crashed through the roofs when disaster happened. The entrance is through a sinkhole or  
 
 
excavation that has unearthed some of the buildings. Typical rooms and corridors are the remains of  
 
 
houses and alleys between them, though generally broken down and damaged.
10 
Chaos Wrought - this dungeon has been worked by the hands of goblins, orcs, trolls and ogres under the 
influence of chaos. The workmanship is shoddy and irregular. Corridors meander and change in size as 
 
you walk along them, doors don’t fit into doorways, rooms are sometimes huge and sometimes tiny. The 
entrance is through an arch of stone, richly decorated with the signs of chaos. There is no such thing as a 
typical room or corridor in this place - it is the product of madness.
11 
Magic Wrought - this dungeon has been created by harnessing magical power, possibly by Dark Elves.  
 
The structure defies logic - stone is shaped at impossible angles, some surfaces are covered with tightly   
 
packed decoration whilst others are eerily smooth, rooms are suspended in stone cages above fathomless 
drops and other such fancies. It is clear that no stonewright, not even the greatest of the dwarves, could 
 
have created this. The entrance is via a mysterious portal or by speaking a rune engraved on a mysterious 
stone pillar. Typical rooms and corridors will have a highly stylised, geometric shape, possibly with 
intricate eldritch decorations.
12 
Biological - the walls of this dungeon are not stone, but wood (or bone). An extreme example would be 
 
crawling through the remains of some great leviathan, more likely the rooms and corridors are made of 
 
densely packed thickets tied about with sharp thorned brambles, or a stand of oversized mushrooms into 
which passages have been carved..or chewed. The entrance is via an opening in the structure where part 
of it has ro8ed (or been eaten) away. Typical rooms and corridors will appear to be parts of whatever   
 
creature or plant created the dungeon.


--- PAGE 165 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
164
To give you some ideas here are some examples of 
different shapes for your dungeon rooms or sections. 
Creating dungeon maps is an excellent opportunity 
to indulge your creativity with all sorts of wacky and 
interesting layouts - try to avoid making them into a 
simple tunnel!


--- PAGE 166 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
165
As well as having different types of rooms, parts of 
your dungeon are probably in different states of 
repair. If you would like your dungeon to be well 
ordered and maintained (it may be somewhere that 
belongs to an organised group like a clan of dark 
elves) you can ignore this, but for a dungeon that is 
home to a variety of monsters and inhabitants it is 
likely that sections each have their own particular 
character.
Table 5.2  Dungeon Condition -  
recommended to roll once for each section of the dungeon (unless otherwise stated the conditions affect both 
Heroes and Monsters).
2d6 
Condition
2 
Crumbling - this place is falling apart! Bits of stone and masonry are peeling off the walls and ceilings   
 
and your stomping around is only making things worse. Every round of combat you must roll a 1d6. On 
a one, a piece of the ceiling has dislodged and is falling on you. You must make a test against SKILL with 
a target number of 10 or suffer one point of STAMINA damage as you are hit by a piece of the ceiling.
3 
Slimy - Moisture hangs heavy in the air, condensation dripping from the walls and ceiling and leaving 
fetid pools filled with foul smelling slime on every floor. Each time you are struck in combat you must   
 
make a SKILL roll with a +2 bonus or slip on the muck and find yourself prone (-4 to combat and  
 
 
movement skills until you spend a round ge8ing to your feet).
4 
Unholy - at some point this place was the site of a temple of evil and traces of that time linger on. If you 
 
use magic to heal yourself you will heal one less point of stamina than normal.
5 
Infernal - strange heat courses through the floor and walls in this area and pools of bubbling hot water   
 
have to be stepped around carefully. If you are in combat, roll a 2d6 each round - on a roll of a 2 a blast   
 
of steam has vented from a nearby crack in the masonry and you suffer 2 points of STAMINA damage.   
 
On the good side, once you have dealt with the encounters in this area you can stop and bathe.
6 
Well lit - Most Catacombs are near pitch black dark, but in this case a strange fungus covers the walls   
 
and ceilings, giving off a purple glow. You don’t need torches here but your Sneak skill has a -1 penalty. 
7 
Consecrated - This area is located at a site that was once a temple of a benevolent god. If you use any   
 
healing magic in here, you gain an additional +1 STAMINA points in recovery.
8 
Overgrown - nature has run riot here, with strange growths sprouting from every surface, tendrils and   
 
roots hanging down from the ceiling. This halves the distance at which ranged weapons can be used and 
in addition, if  you miss in combat with a melee weapon roll 1d6 - on a result of 1 your weapon is snared 
in a vine and you need to spend a round working it free unless you make a successful Strength skill test.
9 
Chilled - Cold radiates from every surface, ba8ering against you like a physical force. Frost and Rime   
 
cover every object, your breath freezes in the air and ice beads your hair. If you stand still for too long   
 
your boots start to freeze to the ground. Resting is difficult here - unless you came prepared with winter 
clothing, you cannot regain STAMINA through sleeping.
10 
Misty - A strange mist swirls through the air penetrating every corner of this dungeon. Awareness skill  
 
has a -2 penalty and Sneak skill has a +2 bonus.
11 
Magically Fecund - the winds of magic are swirling vigorously in this dungeon, making spell casting   
 
easier. Your Magic-Wizardry and Magic-Sorcery skill rolls gain a +1 bonus.
12 
Magically Barren - the winds of magic blow only weakly in this place making it difficult to gather the   
 
energy needed for spellcasting. Your Magic-Wizardry and Magic-Sorcery skill rolls suffer a -1 penalty.


--- PAGE 167 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
166
Just as the rooms within a dungeon might be in all 
types of altered states, the creatures you encounter 
might also be affected by some change, good or bad. 
Use this table to find out how they should be adjusted 
- you can work it out once for the whole dungeon or 
roll separately for each section as you work your way 
through.
Table 5.3  Creature Condition - 
recommended to roll once for each section of the dungeon. Apply the effects to all encounters in this section.
2d6 
Creature Condition
2 
Well-fed - The creatures of this place have been particularly well supplied with food recently - some  
 
 
unlucky adventurers perhaps - and you must add +1 STAMINA to each creature you encounter
3 
Noisy - Creatures here are particularly noisy and unsubtle, making no a8empt to conceal themselves -   
 
you may add +1 to your Awareness skill rolls whilst in this dungeon.
4 
Starving - The creatures of this area are running low on supplies and are starving. You may reduce the   
 
STAMINA of every creature by 1 point (to a minimum of one).
5 
Plagued - a foul stench fills the air down here and you cough and splu8er on bi8er spores that seem to   
 
fill the air. The creatures you encounter are plagued and after any combat, roll 1d6. On a roll of 1 you   
 
must either test your LUCK or roll on Table 4.3.2 ‘Diseases’.
6 
Infested - The sound of scu8ling claws is nearly constant here. Any encounter in this area comes with an 
additional Grannit - see encounter C24 - which you have to deal with.
7 
Riches - The monsters of this place have had particularly good luck with their raiding and delving. Every 
creature you defeat has an additional 1d6 pieces of gold in its hoard.
8 
Toxic - the monsters here have some access to supplies of poison - each time you are hit by a weapon,   
 
take an additional point of damage from the toxins.
9 
Armoured - A skilled armourer has passed through this dungeon, fixing up rents and patching over gaps 
- humanoid monsters gain +1 bonus to their armour rolls.
10 
Under equipped - weapons have been hard to come by, so for any humanoid monster you fight roll 1d6. 
On a 5 or 6, the monster a8acks with a club instead of their normal weapon.
11 
Lazy - the creatures here have obviously been left alone for a while and have become very lazy and  
 
 
indolent. For each encounter roll 1d6 - on the 
result of 1, the monster is sleeping when you 
encounter it!  This means you make an 
a8ack in the first round with the advantage of 
surprise - +6 to your combat roll 
and +2 to your damage roll.
12 
Wary - the creatures here are cautious or 
scared. In the first round of combat they use 
the Defensive combat option (they have +2 to 
their combat roll but do no damage if they 
win the round).


--- PAGE 168 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
167
Creating a Dungeon Map
There are various methods you can use to create a 
map for your dungeon, use whichever you prefer - 
the rules should work, with some adjustment, for all 
of them. You should create each section on its own 
map or piece of paper, to keep things clear. Here are 
some methods for creating your dungeon map:
Create a map: Either on paper or a computer, this 
simple and popular method requires only your time 
and imagination. Now you have a number of rooms 
and a rough description (from the dungeon origins 
and conditions tables) simply map out a set of rooms 
that fit your purposes, remembering to include an 
entrance and exit for each section.
Borrow a map: With the popularity of role playing 
games on the rise there are a huge number of maps 
available online, many for free. Choose one that you 
like and download or print it off - the dungeon origin 
and conditions should help you choose.
Use the ‘Dice Drop’ method: Described in the core 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook as a means of 
creating a dungeon, the dice drop method creates a 
random pa8ern of locations which you then fill in 
using your imagination. A piece of paper, pencil and 
some dice are all that is required. Very useful when 
you are struggling for inspiration!
The ‘No Map’ Method
It may be that you don’t have the time or materials to 
hand to make a dungeon map or you just want to get 
on straight into the action. You can do this using a 
room-by-room approach, where you simply assume 
that every room you enter has enough exits to lead 
you onto the next room and then use Table 5.4 ‘Room 
Contents’ to create them as you go. You can still apply 
dungeon 
conditions 
(table 
5.2) 
and 
creature 
conditions (table 5.3) and divide your dungeon into 
sections by rerolling these factors after you have 
completed the appropriate number of rooms. Whilst 
this is undoubtedly faster it means you do not have a 
map to refer to if you want to go back through the 
dungeon or find a room which is important for a 
mission or quest.
Creating Dungeon Rooms
Once you have a basic map for your dungeon you 
need to delve into the details to find out what each 
room has in store. You can do this as you go along or 
work out what all the rooms contain before you travel 
through the section. As always, if the results of the 
table are at odds with your adventure you should feel 
free to alter them to be more appropriate. As with 
every part of this book the intention is to create an 
interesting and engaging map for your adventures 
which you can then refine.
The tables and sections below will allow you to work 
out details such as room type, room conditions and 
room contents including monsters, traps, doors or 
other features. 
The dungeon origin is rolled once for the whole 
dungeon; the dungeon and creature conditions are 
rolled once for each section; the room type, 
conditions and contents are rolled separately for each 
room. This ensures that your dungeon is full of 
variety and surprises!


--- PAGE 169 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
168
Room Types (Shape and Size)
Different rooms have different challenges that can 
have an effect on fighting and exploration, but they 
can be boiled down into a few simple ideas - the 
shape of the room and its size being the most 
important. For the shape of the room, consider the 
dungeon origin - see the examples included above for 
some ideas. A natural cave system will have rooms 
that are oddly shaped with few straight lines or 
regular curves. A former dwarven mine will be far 
more orderly, with straight lines and smooth curves 
dominating. Room size is likely to have an impact on 
gameplay - large open rooms will favour archers and 
narrow twisting corridors will be useful to 
those who want to creep up on their 
opponents. The important thing is that the 
room 
should 
be 
large 
enough 
to 
accommodate all the monsters and objects 
inside it.
To keep things clear and simple, it is 
recommended that each dungeon section 
should be mapped out on its own piece of 
paper and that room size and shape reflect 
its origin and contents.
Room Contents
There are lots of elements that can be 
brought together to create varied and 
challenging dungeons and fill your rooms 
with surprises. Once you have your map 
and have decided on room size and shape, 
it’s time to bring them to life (or unlife, 
depending on the occupants!). Room 
contents 
have 
been 
divided 
into 
Occupants, 
Entrance, 
Condition 
and 
Features. 
Of 
these 
categories 
only 
‘Occupants’ are needed to fill up your 
dungeon with monsters, so if you are in a 
hurry either skip through the other rolls or 
look at the tables for inspiration as to how 
you want to ‘furnish’ your rooms. The 
tables will generate a varied set of rooms 
to explore but you may also decide that you want to 
give your dungeon a particular look or feel to it, or 
you may think that some of the results are 
contradictory. For example, if the dungeon origin is a 
Lair, you might decide that it shouldn’t have 
portcullises blocking the entrances to rooms. 
As with the rest of this book, the results on the tables 
can be used as a source of inspiration rather than a 
hard set of rules. If you don’t like a result or cannot 
work out how to use it, the best advice is to ignore it 
or come up with a replacement idea of your own.


--- PAGE 170 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
169
Table 5.4 Room Contents. 
Roll separately for each category to generate your room contents then refer to the sections below to find out 
the details. Rooms can have occupants, entrance features, conditions and features. 
Occupants* 
(multiple 
occupants can be all the 
same kind of monster or roll 
each one separately)
Entrance Feature - Table 5.8
Room Conditions - Table 5.9
Room Features - Table 5.10
Roll 2d6:  
2: Two occupants one with SKILL increased by one*  
3: 1d3 occupants all with STAMINA reduced by one 
4: 2 occupants both with STAMINA reduced by 2 
5:1d3 occupants, but reduce their SKILL by one 
6: Empty 
7: One occupant 
8: Empty 
9: One Occupant 
10: One Occupant increase its SKILL by one 
11: Two occupants, reduce the SKILL of one by one 
12: One occupant but increase the SKILL by two. 
Roll 1d6. 1-3: Nothing, 4-5: One entrance has a feature, 6: Two entrances have 
features.
Roll 1d6. 1-4: Nothing, 5-6: One Condition.
Roll 1d6. 1-4: Nothing, 5-6: One Feature.
*See the advice given below regarding difficulty, ‘Table 5.5 - Encounter Difficulty: Dungeon Encounter by Hero 
Grade’. Increasing the SKILL of a monster is roughly equivalent to increasing the ‘dungeon level’ by one. If a 
room has more than one occupant, it is assumed that they are somehow allies (a humanoid with a pet beast, an 
undead and an elemental set to guard a room together etc). You must fight both occupants at the same time.
Unveiling Rooms as a Solo Player
In order to maintain an element of surprise about 
room contents a solo player can follow a simple order 
to ‘unveil’ a room. Firstly roll for any entrance 
features (Table 5.4 then Table 5.8 if there is something) 
then decide if you can see into the room or not. For 
example, if your way is blocked by a heavy stone 
door than you probably have to accept that breaking 
it down will alert any monsters inside the room and 
mean you have to deal with them (see Table 3.1.1 
Standard Encounter Options) but if there is no door 
(or just a flimsy one) you should be able to peer in 
and decide, based on what you see, if you want to 
enter or not. At this point you should make an 
Awareness skill check. If you pass the test, you can 
roll for all the other contents of the room - occupants, 
conditions, features and so on and act accordingly, 
including preparing yourself with spells and 
consumable items. If you fail the Awareness skill test 
you either don’t spot the dangers or don’t understand 
what you are seeing and must enter the room before 
you roll for all the room contents. You can still 
prepare yourself, but you will have to guess what is 
the best course of action.


--- PAGE 171 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
170
 Of course, your hero can always decide to retreat and 
try to find another way around if they can’t see what 
is in a room and there are a number of magical 
abilities (such as the wizard spell ‘See Through’) that 
may allow you to bypass barriers or obstructions and 
discover what is in a room before you enter it.
The important thing is that you acknowledge that 
your hero doesn’t always know what they are facing; 
dealing with unexpected problems is an important 
part of the adventure.
Room Occupants
As the brave hero moves through a dungeon, one 
question is foremost in their mind - what awaits me? 
What sort of hellish beasts are gibbering in the 
darkness, waiting to consume me? Whilst not 
everything you meet in a dungeon is deadly, in 
general you will have to fight your way through.
The monsters that inhabit your dungeon can be 
placed by your design or by rolling on the random 
encounter tables given below. An important thing to 
ask oneself is - which table should I use? As a guide 
we recommend the following, based on the strength 
of your hero. This should provide a challenge for a 
solo hero; if you are making your dungeon for a 
group of heroes you could increase the difficulty by 
one or more steps (so a group of three ‘civilians’ 
would be treated as a ‘novice’, a group of three 
‘veterans’ would be treated as an ‘expert’ or ‘master’ 
depending on how capable you feel the group is). If 
you are not sure, try the dungeon at the lower level of 
difficulty and increase it as you go. You might start by 
having the first section of the dungeon at an ‘easy’ 
level, see how much challenge it offers your heroes 
and increase or decrease it based on that.
Table 5.5 Encounter Difficulty: Dungeon Encounter by Hero Grade
Hero Grade  
Improvement  Maximum  
 
Which Dungeon Level is recommended for a solo player or small 
Points  
SKILL / MAGIC 
group*
Civilian  
2 
 
4 / 2 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 1 but with -2 SKILL, -2 STAMINA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied to the monsters.
Novice  
5 
 
5 / 5 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 1
Competent 
7 
 
6 / 6 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 1 but with +1 SKILL, +2 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters or Dungeon Level 2
Veteran  
8 
 
7 / 7 
 
 
A hero created using the standard rules. Use Dungeon 
Level 2 or 3
Expert  
9 
 
8 / 8 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 3 but with +1 SKILL, +3 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters or Dungeon Level 4
Master  
10 
 
9 / 9 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 4
Champion  
11 
 
10 / 10  
 
Use Dungeon Level 4 but with +1 SKILL, +4 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters, or Dungeon Level 5
*Difficulty is very hard to judge. If you are finding the encounters too easy, increase the Dungeon Level you are 
rolling on. If you are finding them too hard, reduce the Dungeon Level. Note that the monsters in Dungeon Level 
5 are generally very deadly.


--- PAGE 172 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
171
 It should be clear that the ‘sections’ of each dungeon 
are NOT levels. A Novice adventurer will be 
challenged by a dungeon in which all the monsters 
are from the ‘Level 1’ encounter table. In other words, 
THE ENTIRE DUNGEON HAS THE SAME LEVEL 
OF DIFFICULTY. This is emphasised to avoid the 
problem of every dungeon becoming impossible to 
complete.
Standard Encounter Options
As a reminder, in Chapter 3 we detailed a number of 
encounter options. A hero may wish to use this (or 
others they can think of) to deal with the challenges 
they face.
Table 3.1.1 Standard Encounter Options - see descriptions in Chapter 3 for more details
Option  
Action
Fight  
Begin combat and resolve it using the normal combat rules, you may use a ranged weapon or  
 
 
 
spell in the first round if you have spo8ed your target.
Flee 
 
Run from combat; test your LUCK to escape or suffer a ‘free hit’.
Sneak  
A8empt to use Sneaking to get past your target, consider what bonuses or penalties apply.
Talk 
 
Use a social skill, you must share a means of communication with your target.
Trick  
A8empt to trick your target in some way, a variety of means including magic can be used.
Bribe  
Offer your target an amount of gold to ignore your actions.
Feed 
 
Offer an animal food in order to distract it.
Monster Encounter Tables
There are a number of dungeon and wilderness 
encounter tables presented in the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy rulebooks. For example, Beyond the Pit has 
encounter tables for dungeon & wilderness monsters 
based on the creatures found in that book, Out of the 
Pit has a different set of tables and Return to the Pit 
has tables which combine more than one book. In 
particular Return to the Pit has at the end a list of 
monsters from a number of bestiaries and sources, 
laid out in alphabetical order. There are two things 
that are clear - firstly, the more books you have access 
to, the more you should use! It is much more 
enjoyable to have access to a wider range of monsters 
to challenge your heroes. The second thing is that it is 
not possible to reproduce the bestiaries from Out of 
the Pit, Beyond the Pit, Return to the Pit and other 
sources in this book, there simply is not the space.
The following monster encounter table is a mixture of 
sources with the SKILL (SK) and STAMINA (ST) and 
A8acks (AT) values given as a quick reference though 
those only represent part of the picture. Most 
creatures really only come to life when you have read 
their 
description 
and 
follow 
their 
suggested 
behaviours or a8ack pa8erns. The source books are 
noted (OotP = Out of the Pit, RtP = Return to the Pit, 
BtP = Beyond the Pit).
To get more variety, you can pick monsters from 
whichever bestiaries you have available or you could 
give the dungeon a theme - fill it with evil 
humanoids, wild beasts, the undead, demons, 
elementals or whatever group you would like to 
ba8le - across the various source books there are 
enough to choose from!   In addition, in section 6.3 
‘Wilderness Encounters’ you will find the encounter 
‘W14 Monster’ which includes a method to create a 
random beast that scales with the strength of your 
hero, giving you an endless source of creatures to 
ba8le.


--- PAGE 173 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
172
Table 5.6 Random Monster Encounters
3d6 
Dungeon Level 1 
 
Dungeon Level 2 
 
Dungeon Level 3 
3-5 
Roll on Dungeon Level 2 
Roll on Dungeon Level 3 
Roll on Dungeon Level 4
6 
Dungeon Denizen* 
 
Dungeon Denizen* 
 
Dungeon Denizen*
5 
Hobgoblin OotP p67  
Giant Centipede OotP p27  
Mucalytic OotP p85
SK6, ST6 
 
 
SK9, ST7 
 
 
SK8 ST9 A82
6 
Flesh Grub p53 
 
Demonic Servant p35  
Wight OotP p119
SK1 ST1 OotP   
 
SK8 ST7  OotP  
 
SK9 ST6
7 
Gremlin OotP p63 
 
Flying Skull R8P p82  
Ogre OotP p90 
 
SK5 ST4  
 
 
SK8 ST5 
 
 
SK8 ST10 A82
8 
Zombie OotP p124 
 
Chameleon Snake BtP p116 Wood Golem OotP p61
SK6 ST6 
 
 
SK6 ST7 
 
 
SK8 ST6
9 
Skeleton OotP p103 
 
Dark Elf OotP p47 
 
Cave Troll OotP p115
SK6 ST5   
 
 
SK7 ST6 
 
 
SK8 ST9
10 
Goblin OotP p60 
 
Great Orc OotP90 
 
Ghoul OotP p57
SK5 ST5  
 
 
SK7 ST6 
 
 
SK8 ST7 A82
11 
Orc OotP p90  
 
Gnoll R8P p94 
 
Barbarian BtP p15
SK6 ST5 
 
 
SK8 ST5 
 
 
SK9 ST8
12 
Giant Rat OotP p96 
 
Skeleton Warrior OotP p103 Flesh Golem OotP p61
SK5 ST4 
 
 
SK8 ST6 
 
 
SK8 ST7 A82
13 
Demonspawn OotP p36 
Crypt Stalker OotP p31 
Alligator R8P p17
SK6 ST6  
 
 
SK8 ST6 
 
 
SK8 ST10 A82 
14 
Rat Man OotP96 
 
Gark OotP p56 
 
Shade BtP p122
SK5 ST6  
 
 
SK7 ST10 
 
 
SK11 ST6
15 
Chest Creature BtP p32 
Half Ogre BtP p98 
 
Giant Spider OotP p108
SK5 ST6 
 
 
SK8 ST9 A82  
 
SK7 ST8 A82
16-18 Grannit OotP p62 
 
Roll on Dungeon Level 1 
Roll on Dungeon Level 2
SK4 ST3 AT1 


--- PAGE 174 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
173
Table 5.6 Random Monster Encounters (cont.)
3d6 
Dungeon Level 4 
 
Dungeon Level 5**
3-5 
Roll on Dungeon Level 5 
Dungeon Denizen*
6 
Dungeon Denizen* 
 
Hell Demon OotP p66
SK14 ST12 A84 
6 
Wrapper OotP p122  
Krell BtP p79
SK12 ST8 
 
 
SK8 ST12 A83 
7 
Mummy OotP p85 
 
Death-Knight BtP p36
SK9 ST12 A82  
 
SK12 ST12 A82 
8 
Smoke Demon BtP p128 
Barrow Guardian R8P p26
SK9 ST12 A82  
 
SK9 ST12 AT1 
9 
Minotaur OotP p83 
 
Vampire OotP p116
SK10 ST10 A82  
 
SK10 ST15 A83 
10 
Grizzly Bear BtP p18  
Two Headed Giant R8P p91
SK9 ST13 A82  
 
SK10 ST10 A83
11 
Stone Golem OotP p61 
Fire Demon OotP p50
SK8 ST11 A82  
 
SK10 ST10 A83 
12 
Chaos Warrior BtP p32 
Lizard King OotP p76
SK10 ST10  
 
 
SK9 ST10 A82 
13 
Cave Giant OotP p58  
Brain Slayer OotP p23
SK9 ST10 A82  
 
SK10 ST10 A82
14 
Ghost BtP57 
 
 
Skull Beast BtP p126
SK9 ST8 
 
 
SK9 ST10 A84 
15 
Great Serpent BtP p116 
Hellhorn R8P p105
SK9 ST12  
 
 
SK9 ST10 A83
16-18 Roll on Dungeon Level 3 
Roll on Dungeon Level 4
*Dungeon Denizen - roll on ‘Table 5.7 Dungeon Denizens’ 
to see who you have met.
**Only one of these monsters will appear, even if the room 
contents table says there are more than one, as they 
are particularly deadly.


--- PAGE 175 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
174
Table 5.7 Dungeon Denizens - Not everything you meet is hostile!
2d6 
Denizen Description
2 
Misplaced Wizard - before you there opens a magic portal through which steps a startled wizard. ‘Oh   
 
my’ she says, looking around. ‘I must have go8en the directions wrong - one moment please!’. Before you 
can really take this all in, another magic portal opens in front of her. She turns and says ‘This one should 
take us outside this place. Do you want to come?’. You can step through the door, which will return you 
to the dungeon entrance, or stand there drooling, in which case the wizard waves goodbye and 
disappears through her portal.
3 
Holy Man - Si8ing cross-legged on what appears to be a bed of nails is an elderly man dressed only in a 
loincloth. His long beard covers most of his chest and belly. His face has a tranquil expression and his 
eyes are closed - as you approach he opens them and looks at you. ‘Do you wish to know your fate?’ he 
asks. If you agree to this, roll 1d6. 1 - He reveals a terrible fate, lose one point of LUCK. 2 - He discusses 
theology with you for so long a wandering monster turns up and a8acks you. 3 - Somehow, he convinces 
you to give him one of your rations, which he eats noisily. You learn nothing. 4 - The mystic rambles 
about gods and prophecies for a while, but it does give you a chance to rest. Restore one point of 
STAMINA. 5 - Looking deep into your eyes the old man speaks to you of your potential and the life of a 
hero. Your confidence rises and you have +1 to all skill tests (including combat) for the next three 
encounters. 6 - The mystic assures you that a wonderful fate awaits you, gain +1 LUCK. You can simply 
ignore the old man, if you try to a8ack him he simply laughs and disappears in a cloud of incense.
4 
Gnome Explorer - a small humanoid, a gnome, makes itself visible to you. It is wearing khaki clothing, 
a dark hat and carries a scroll in one hand in which it is making notes about the dungeon. The gnome 
explains it is carefully exploring the dungeon on the orders of its king and is willing to share some 
information for a price. For 2d6gp it will reveal the location of any traps in this section of the dungeon (if 
there are any) and you may automatically avoid them. If a8acked the gnome will turn invisible and 
scu8le off to parts unknown.
5 
Terrified Prospector - Hiding in a corner, shivering in fear is a dirty faced man carrying a pickaxe and a 
bucket. He is dressed in tough leather clothing and has a tool belt. He quickly explains that he came into 
the dungeon looking for ores and now wishes only to leave. You may direct him to the exit, a service for 
which he will give you a nugget worth 3d6gp, or you can recruit him. He will follow you until you have 
made two tests against Strength skill - his presence gives you a +4 bonus to the test. After he has helped 
you twice, his nerve will fail and he will scarper for the exit.
6 
Adventurer - you have met another adventurer SKILL 7 STAMINA 10 Weapon: Sword Armour: Shield   
+ Mail Hauberk. You eye each other warily for a moment by the light of your torches. You can ignore 
them and move on with a few grunted words, or try to recruit them. Make a Leadership (or Bribery if 
you are willing to spend 1d6gp) test - if you succeed they will accompany you for a while, fighting 
alongside you against the next two monsters you encounter. If you try to a8ack them they will flee out 
of the dungeon, hurling curses at you.
7 
Captive - you have found someone being held captive in the dungeon. Roll 1d6 - 1: Elf, 2: Dwarf, 3-6: 
Human. They are dressed in rags and in a terrible state, barely alive. If you offer them one of your rations 
they will gain the strength to leave the dungeon and the next time you are in a city they will find you and 
give you 3d6gp as a reward. If you do not wish to share your rations, they will lie down and await the 
inevitable...


--- PAGE 176 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
175
8 
Dwarf Pedlar - A Dwarf with a large bundle of everyday objects is taking a rest here. You can trade with 
him for common items including meals (he has six meals worth of rat & mushroom stew available). He 
is also capable of repairing damaged armour for 5gp. He is not much interested in small talk or in 
explaining why the monsters leave him alone and if you a8ack him he will drop a stink bomb to distract 
you and flee.
9 
Thief - you must make an Awareness skill test with a -3 penalty to spot the thief, if you fail he will stay  
hidden and quietly move away once you are gone. If you spot him, the thief will sheepishly step out of 
the shadows and introduce themself. They have come into the dungeon seeking treasure and are 
carefully working their way around avoiding combat. They offer to assist you in return for half of all 
treasure - they have Awareness 9, Sneaking 10, Trap Knowledge 10 and Locks 9. They will not fight and 
will stay with you as long as you are willing to split the loot! If you a8ack them, they will flee whilst 
hurling curses at you - this thief is a very fast and acrobatic runner!
10 
Dwarven Scout - As you enter you hear a ‘psst’ from one wall. Looking round you see that hidden 
behind a cunningly concealed screen there is a dwarf, dressed in the darkened armour of a scout. He 
quickly explains that he is checking out the dungeon, but got injured - would you mind reporting back 
to him on what you find? For every room you explore he will pay 1gp when you return to him with 
details about what you’ve found. If you wish to fight him he will spit curses at you whilst fighting. He 
has SKILL 7 STAMINA 5 Weapon: Mace Armour: Chain Cuirass, he has 6 meals, a backpack, waterskin 
but no gold (he has hidden his purse in a secret cranny you cannot find).
11 
Ghost - Floating mournfully in this room is the ghost of 
a young woman. Her lips move but no sound comes 
out apart from an unintelligible whispering, though 
from her face and hands you can see that she is 
pleading with you. Every time you kill a monster in this 
dungeon, roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 you find a locket with 
a picture of a young man and a young girl in it. If you 
return it to the ghost, she seems to thank you before 
both ghost and locket disappear. You can restore one 
point of temporary LUCK and one point of STAMINA.
12 
Elven Sorcerer - Before you stands an elf, wearing 
chainmail and holding a longspear. ‘Stop there 
stranger’ he says, lowering the point of his weapon ‘I 
mean you no harm, but am wary. Explain your 
purpose’. This elf tells you he is a sorcerer that has been 
searching this dungeon for spell components and is 
now leaving. He is willing to sell you two components 
for sorcery spells, though at twice the normal price. If 
you a8ack him he has SKILL 6 STAMINA 14 MAGIC 6 
Inner Strength 9 and will use his Sorcery spells to make 
good an escape.


--- PAGE 177 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
176
Monster Weapons & Armour
Most monster descriptions do not include specific 
weapons and armour though it is obvious that 
humanoid monsters will use such items. You should 
consider what equipment and items they may have to 
hand when you encounter them - it’s unlikely that 
they will be naked but equally unlikely that they will 
always be found carrying an arsenal of weapons. If 
the description in the bestiary does not provide clues 
you should use some common sense - a lowly goblin 
might have a handaxe and a leather cuirass and is 
extremely unlikely to be wearing plate mail. On the 
other hand the leader of an orc tribe could easily be 
wielding a mighty ba8leaxe and wearing a 
breastplate or a chain hauberk. If you can’t make 
your mind up, use these guidelines.
• Poor creatures (SKILL 1-6) could have simple 
weapons such as clubs, daggers, short swords, 
spears and basic armour such as a leather cuirass 
or hauberk or a small shield.
• Average creatures (SKILL 7-9) could have 
common martial weapons such as long swords, 
morning stars, maces and chainmail armour or 
medium shields.
• Rich creatures (SKILL 10+) could have unusual 
weapons such as two-handed swords or a 
ba8leaxe and they may have the highest quality 
(breastplate or plate mail) armour.
It’s important that humanoid monsters are given at 
least some basic equipment or they will present li8le 
threat to your heroes.
For non-humanoid monsters or those that do not use 
equipment, such as humanoid demons or elementals, 
armour is generally listed as ‘light’, ‘medium’ or 
‘heavy’ which refer to the armour tracks given in the 
core Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook as 
‘monster light armour’, ‘monster medium armour’ 
and ‘monster heavy armour’ and weapons are 
generally given as Small, Large or Very Large Bite / 
Claw which function in the same way as weapons 
and have damage tracks given in the core rulebook.
If you come across a monster that does not have a 
clear weapon or armour type listed it is up to you to 
provide them with something appropriate based on 
the description. As with humanoids, they will not 
present much of a threat if you don’t!
Monster Behaviour
The descriptions of the monsters should be read 
before you enter the room to try and gauge what they 
might be doing. Typical monster behaviours you 
might encounter can include:
• Humanoids are living in the dungeon or 
exploring it - the rooms will be furnished to 
accommodate them and probably contain their 
belongings. They may be wary or relaxed. On a 
roll of 1 on 1d6, they will be asleep (assuming the 
hero hasn’t had to break their way in). If they are 
asleep, your first a8ack will automatically hit for 
maximum damage.
• Beasts are living in the dungeon or have 
wandered in. The rooms may well be their lair. 
Like all beasts they are likely to be wary and alert. 
On a roll of 1 on 1d6, they will be asleep (assuming 
the hero hasn’t had to break their way in).
• Undead that are capable of thought will behave 
like humanoids, but mindless undead will be 
simply wandering the dungeon or waiting for 
victims.
• Demons will act according to their intelligence 
and abilities. Some will simply be hunting for 
victims though more intelligent demons might 
have turned part of the dungeon into a temporary 
home on the mortal plane.


--- PAGE 178 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
177
• Other creatures such as elementals, constructs or 
magical creatures are likely to have been placed in 
the dungeon in order to a8ack interlopers; they 
may be hidden or concealed in some way and they 
are likely to a8ack on sight.
• ‘Weak’ monsters, those that pose li8le threat to 
the hero might a8empt to flee or surrender if they 
are intelligent
• Intelligent monsters that sense the hero 
approaching (if they have to ba8er down a door, 
for example) might a8empt to hide and ambush. If 
that is appropriate the hero should make a 
contested roll against the monsters SKILL using 
their Awareness.
Overall, you should read the descriptions given in the 
bestiaries and decide what the monsters are up to 
based on their type, capabilities and intelligence. An 
ogre is stupid and aggressive, they are unlikely to 
hide in wait or flee combat. A goblin might be 
cunning and vicious but also cowardly.
Themed Dungeons
The intention of this chapter is to provide you with 
the means to create dungeons with the minimum of 
effort and planning, but of course you might want to 
create them based on a specific theme or idea that will 
affect encounters, layout, room contents and so on. 
Each of these themes would, if we wanted to explore 
the ideas fully, require their own set of tables for each 
aspect of the dungeon most of which would simply 
be an edited version of what we have already 
provided thus filling up space without adding 
anything substantial to the options available. For 
encounters we would also need to provide details of 
sets or groups of monsters across several bestiaries, 
which might be a problem if you do not have access 
to them, and we cannot know which of those 
excellent books you have to hand.
Instead of going into this level of detail we will 
provide some guidance on how to design a themed 
dungeon and how you might best make use of the 
options in this chapter.
• The first step is to come up with a theme, we 
have provided some in section 6.4 ‘Unusual 
Locations & Themes’ that may help you come up 
with ideas. It should be relevant to your campaign.
• Keep the dungeon divided into sections as this 
makes creating a map and working out contents 
much simpler; breaking down a large project into 
a series of smaller pieces allows you to work on it 
one part at a time and you can always add extra 
sections as you need them.
• The dungeon origin, condition and creature 
conditions should all follow your main theme. 
Either choose some that are appropriate from the 
tables or create ones of your own based on what 
the inhabitants would do and the sort of structure 
they would occupy.
• The difficulty level should be based on the 
strength of your heroes. If you are uncertain try 
making the first section relatively easy (weak 
monsters, few traps) and build up from there. It is 
always easier to add more monsters than have 
some suddenly disappear!
• Room contents should follow the theme. A 
warren of tunnels dug out by giant insects will not 
have many doors or traps as they have none of 
them, but a goblin fortress will have plenty of both 
and lots of furniture appropriate to humanoids.
• Instead of rolling for encounters, fill the 
dungeon with monsters that are appropriate to 
your theme and remember to scour the bestiaries 
for foes that fit within your overall idea. You don’t 
want to have your heroes face the same enemies 
again and again as this will quickly become 
boring.


--- PAGE 179 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
178
• Instead of assigning treasure randomly (Chapter 
13) assign and distribute it in an appropriate way. 
• Consider giving your dungeon an ‘owner’ or 
master. This should be a particularly powerful 
monster that is also capable of controlling or 
dominating the other creatures. If they are 
intelligent they may have created the dungeon or 
at least modified parts of it to suit their tastes.
In section 6.4 ‘Unusual Locations & Themes we look 
at some specific examples of themed 
dungeons 
and 
their 
impact 
on 
gameplay. Creating one takes longer 
than using the random method but it can 
also provide a far more satisfying 
experience for your heroes.
Room Features 
As well as monsters the rooms and 
corridors themselves may have features 
or conditions that have an impact on our 
heroes.
Room Entrance Features
As you progress through a dungeon, 
you may be able to simply enter rooms 
or you might face some challenge, 
something barring your way. Use this 
table to find out what the entrance to 
your room is like - this applies either to 
the first entrance you discover or all 
entrances, as noted on Table 5.4 Room 
Contents. 
Inside the room you can find either a key 
or mechanism to open locked doors or 
portcullises, but you must have defeated 
any monsters before you can make that 
search. A hero might be able to avoid a 
problem by going around and through another 
entrance, but that could involve other dangers.
Note that you should take care before you use this 
option - if your heroes have no means to open or 
break down a locked door or portcullis, they may 
find themselves completely stuck and unable to move 
forward! Clearly, you should consider this factor 
carefully before you include any impassable features.


--- PAGE 180 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
179
Table 5.8 Room Entrance Features
2d6 
Feature
2 
Heavy Door: The way is barred by a locked stone door, requiring either magic or a Locks skill test to 
open. Bashing it open takes one hour, a8racts a wandering monster (roll on the monster encounter table) 
and obviously alerts those inside to your presence.
3 
Locked Door: Your way is barred by a locked wooden door, requiring either magic or a Locks skill test 
to open. Cu8ing it down or levering it off its hinges takes fifteen minutes
4 
Disjointed: At some point the room and corridor have moved out of alignment. Ge8ing up to the room 
ahead requires a Climb skill roll. Take 1d3 points of falling damage each time you fail.
5 
Portcullis: You are facing a portcullis; you can peer through the bars, but lifting it will require a test of 
Strength skill or you can use Trap Knowledge to activate the mechanism. The portcullis can be ‘levered’ 
up inch by inch in twenty minutes if all else fails, alerting anything inside.
6 
Alarm: The room entrance is guarded by a magical alarm. Make a Second Sight or Trap Knowledge skill 
to spot it; if you succeed you can step carefully over the rune on the floor, if you fail an alarm will sound 
ruining any a8empt at Sneaking and a8racting a wandering monster.
7 
Flimsy Door: The room has a flimsy door that is partly open allowing you to see into the room from the 
corridor. You may hide here before entering, +2 to Awareness skill test when peering in.
8 
Pit: The room has a pit dug (or naturally appearing) between the corridor and the room. A Jump skill test 
will clear it, if you fail you land awkwardly and take one point of STAMINA damage.
9 
Rubble: Rocks (or wood or bones) have fallen across the entrance; you can make a Strength skill test to 
pull the barrier away or Acrobatics to wriggle through. 
Digging through takes ten minutes and alerts anything 
inside the room to your presence. If you do have a pick 
or shovel, you can break through in five minutes.
10 
Alcove: The corridor opens into the room without 
fanfare, but there is a small alcove here where you may 
safely place a torch or lantern.
11 
Curtain: The entrance way is barred by a flimsy piece of 
fabric or some natural material like webs or vines. You 
may sneak up and peer through the holes to look into 
the room. Gain +1 to Awareness and Sneaking as you 
enter this room.
12 
Nook: A large nook by the entrance affords you a place 
to hide and observe its contents. Gain +3 to  Awareness 
and Sneaking skill tests for entering this room.


--- PAGE 181 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
180
Room Condition
Just as the dungeon might be in less than pristine 
condition, the spaces within it are also varied. One 
room might be flooded, another might be dry but full 
of rubbish. You should think about how the overall 
dungeon condition interacts with the state of the 
rooms. For example, if the dungeon condition is 
‘Chilled’ then a room that is flooded will, in fact, be 
full of frozen water. If the dungeon condition is 
‘Infernal’ then you might conclude that the water has 
evaporated and the room is now filled with thick 
steam.
Table 5.9 Room Condition (effects apply to both Heroes and monsters).
2d6 
Condition
2 
Unstable - the floor of this room is broken and crumbling, parts of it falling into deep channels below. If 
you fight here, test your Acrobatics skill each round. If you fail, you have stumbled and suffer a -2 to your 
movement and combat skill rolls that round as you frantically a8empt to regain your balance.
3 
Flooded - this room is flooded to a significant depth, meaning you have to wade through it carefully. 
Combat, Movement and Sneaking skills suffer a -3 penalty. This applies to both you and any monsters.
4 
Choking Dust - the air in this room contains great amounts of dust or spores, causing you to cough and 
splu8er. You must make a test against STAMINA using 3d6 or suffer -2 to spell casting rolls and any 
other skills that involve speech.
5 
Sloped - some great event (or just the weight of ages) has twisted this room and left the floor at a 
significant angle. Roll 1d6 - 1-3 you enter on the high side, 4-6 you enter on the low side. If you fight, 
apply a -1 penalty if you are fighting upwards and a +1 bonus if you are fighting downwards.
6 
Rat run - some kind of vermin has made its nest in the walls of this chamber. If you listen quietly you can 
hear scratching and squeaking. There is a sharp smell like mouse urine permeating the air and droppings 
on every surface. If you should rest here, deduct one portion of rations which gets gnawed into crumbs 
as you sleep. It’s not possible to get rid of the infestation without special means.
7 
Natural Light - shafts or cracks have penetrated deep into the earth, breaking through the ceiling of this 
room. Natural light spills down them, though they are not large enough to climb up. You do not need 
torches here (in the daytime) and the air is sweeter.
8 
Clu=ered - this room is full of piles of rubbish - broken bits of furniture, rocks, piles of bones - the exact 
type of jumble will depend on the dungeon. The effect is that Sneaking gains a +2 bonus whilst ranged 
a8acks suffer a -2 penalty.
9 
Chambered - around the edges of this room are small side chambers of varying size. They do not affect 
your skill tests but are useful if you wish to rest here, as they afford you a place to conceal yourself whilst 
you sleep. Should you wish to, you can rest here as if you were in a transition room.
10 
Map - a crude map of this dungeon has been carved into one of the walls. It has a few details, but the 
markings are unusual and not well known to you. Studying it, you gain +1 to your Awareness, 
Underground Lore and Trap Lore skill tests in this section of the dungeon.
11 
Runed - someone (or something) has engraved strange runes across the walls, floor and ceiling of this 
room. If you have the skill Magic Lore you may a8empt to decipher them and gain a special insight. If 
you succeed your Magic Lore skill test, your next skill test after that has a +2 bonus. If you fail, you have 
misread the runes and your next skill test has a -2 penalty.
12 
Unmarked Passage - this room contains a small exit which, when investigated, leads to a rough tunnel 
leading out of the dungeon and back to the surface. You may use this to move in or out of the dungeon 
as you wish. This passage is in addition to any other ways in and out of the room.


--- PAGE 182 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
181
Room Features
These are unusual elements to the room that may 
affect what you do here; if the room contains a trap 
you must encounter it as you enter the room. A 
successful Awareness or Trap Knowledge skill roll 
allows you to avoid it. Obviously, finding a room 
with both occupants and a trap can be very deadly. 
Other features can be dealt with as you please; they 
remain here once discovered.
Table 5.10 Room Features
For Traps, use Table 4.4.2 ‘Traps’ to see what you are facing.
2d6 
Feature
2 
Deadly Trap: This room contains a vicious trap - if you fall victim, add 3 points of STAMINA damage to 
whatever you suffer. See the trap table for details.
3 
Cunning Trap: This contains a well concealed trap. Spo8ing it has a penalty of -3 to your Awareness or 
Trap Knowledge skill test. See the trap table for details.
4 
Secret Door: See the text below describing secret doors & roll again on this table ignoring any further 
secret door results.
5 
Trap: Roll on the Traps table.
6 
Fountain or Spring: Here is a source of clean water where you may refill your waterskins. 
7 
Side Chamber:  this room has a small side chamber or large alcove which is either hidden from view or 
protected by a sturdy door or barricade of natural materials. You may rest here and only roll only once 
per eight hours to see if you are found by a wandering monster.
8 
Secret Door: See the text below describing secret doors.
9 
Fungi: Large fungi grow on the walls of this chamber. If you pass an Underground Lore skill test they 
can be safely harvested to provide 1d6 meals. If you fail the test the food is poisoned and you suffer 1d3 
points of STAMINA damage when you eat it.
10 
Trap: Roll on the Traps table and roll again on this table ignoring any further trap results.
11 
Workshop: This room has been used as a workshop of some kind (roll 1d6 - 1-2: Kitchen, 3-4: Forge, 5-6: 
Leatherworking) and contains tools and 
equipment needed to carry out those 
activities. As a result of the clu8er, With 
plenty of things to hide behind, Sneaking 
skill rolls gain a +1 bonus. You can stop 
here and use the tools should you wish 
to.
12 
Stores: This room must once have been 
used as a storehouse or supply dump by 
a group of humanoids. Although much 
of it is decayed, you can recover six 
torches, a mining pick, backpack, 50’ of 
rope, one weapon (your choice) and 
twenty pieces of ammunition for a 
ranged weapon (arrows, slingstones or 
bolts).


--- PAGE 183 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
182
Traps
In a world such as Titan, it is not uncommon to find 
someone has placed a deadly trap to harm the 
careless or unwary traveller. Table 4.4.2 ‘Traps’, 
provides some examples to test your wit. Spo8ing a 
trap can be done by succeeding in a test of your Trap 
Knowledge or Awareness skill, but only if you are 
actively searching for them. This means moving 
slowly and carefully - if you are running, fighting or 
otherwise distracted, you can take a skill test but with 
a -4 penalty. If you fail, you must suffer the effects. If 
you succeed you can avoid the trap. If you have used 
your Trap Knowledge skill, you can also disarm the 
trap.
You can also use LUCK to avoid the effects of a trap - 
the LUCK test should be made before you roll for 
damage!
 You can choose to test against your Trap Knowledge 
skill instead of any listed for the specific trap. A 
success indicates that you have avoided the 
dangerous effects of the trap. You can make a second 
test against your Trap Knowledge skill in order to 
deactivate it. If you succeed in this roll you gain 1d6 
gold pieces worth of components, but if you fail this 
second roll you suffer the effects of the trap as your 
fumblings activate it. Once the trap is activated or 
disarmed, remove it from the map. You may also test 
your LUCK to avoid a trap, as usual
Table 4.4.2 Traps
2d6 
Trap Description 
2 
Acid Bath: A part of the ground has been rigged to give way, sending you slithering down into an acid 
filled stone bath! You can test against your Climb skill with a -3 penalty (the sides are slippery) or plunge 
into the corrosive liquid and suffer 1d6 points of damage (no Dodge or armour). Each round test Climb 
skill at -3 to scrabble back out or suffer a further point of damage. When you get out, roll 1d6 for each 
piece of equipment you carry - on a roll of 1 the acid has destroyed it! Only magical items are immune to 
this. This well concealed trap imposes -2 on Trap Knowledge to spot it.
3 
Unstoppa-Ball: A neatly hidden pressure plate releases a heavy metal ball down a chute and straight into 
you! Test against your Dodge skill with a -2 penalty or take 3+1d6 points of damage and you are knocked 
down. The ball is worth 1d6 gp but occupies three equipment slots if you want to carry it. This trap is 
well made and using Trap Knowledge has a -2 penalty.
4 
Vortex of Magic: When activated by your presence a concealed rune unleashes a vortex of wild magic. 
You are teleported to a random location (roll or drop a dice onto your map to find out where if you are 
in a city or dungeon). The magic also mangles you for 1d6 points of damage which cannot be prevented 
with armour or Dodge skill. If you have the Second Sight skill you may test against it to spot the rune 
before it activates. If you a8empt to use Trap Knowledge you must take a -3 penalty due to the unusual 
nature of the trap.
5 
Poisoned Dart: A wicked person has secreted a spring loaded poisoned dart in a gap in the nearby 
stonework. If you spot it you are able to jump out of the way as the dart whips past you. If you fail the 
skill test, you are stung by the dart and suffer 3 points of STAMINA damage as the poison sets your body 
on fire.
6 
Chaos Rune: A magic user has inscribed a dangerous rune trap in this area - test against your Second 
Sight skill. If you succeed, you notice its emanations and are able to move carefully past it. If you fail, the 
rune is triggered and you are drained of 1d6 MAGIC points. If you do not have magic points, you will 
feel a slight chilling but suffer no other effects.


--- PAGE 184 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
183
7 
Pit Trap: Amazingly, someone has dug out a 
pit without anyone noticing their work. 
Maybe they did it at night. In any case, as the 
ground beneath you gives way, you must test 
your Jump skill. A success means you have 
leapt clear, failure means you drop a few feet 
onto ragged shards of rusty metal, taking 1d6 
points of STAMINA damage as a result. You 
may climb out relatively easily.
8 
Spore Bag: A pressure plate has been rigged 
here, which when activated punctures a 
concealed bag of noxious spores which fill this 
area with a choking cloud. Test against your 
Acrobatics skill. If you succeed you manage to 
dive and roll out of the cloud before you are 
affected, if you fail you take a lungful of spores 
and suffer a racking cough for the rest of the 
day - you have -1 penalty to your SKILL until 
you have rested overnight.
9 
Drop stone: Your movements see you
blundering upon a tripwire which has 
released a large stone block from above you. 
Test your Dodge skill. If you succeed, you 
have quickly sidestepped the block and are 
unharmed (if dusty). If you fail, a hefty clunk 
onto your head leaves you reeling - suffer 1d6 
points of STAMINA damage. If you wear a 
metal helmet, you take 1 point of damage.
10 
Spray of Acid: When touched a disguised lever sets off a spring loaded piston that shoots a spray of 
strong acid over you! Test your Acrobatics skill. If you succeed you manage to dive out of the way before 
the acid soaks you. If you fail, the burning liquid causes you 1 point of STAMINA damage and also 
degrades your armour. Your Armour rolls have a -1 penalty until you can pay a suitable merchant 2d6 
gold pieces to repair it. 
11 
Spiked Stick: A spiked length of wood has been rigged with a tripwire to swing out and impale you. You 
may test against your Dodge skill to avoid it. It is a crude trap and causes only one point of damage.
12 
Broken Trap: Someone has already fallen victim to this trap - if you have Trap Knowledge you can 
scavenge 2d6 gp worth of machinery, otherwise you move carefully past.


--- PAGE 185 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
184
Secret Doors 
Many dungeons contain secret or hidden routes 
through them, undoubtedly used by the inhabitants 
to surprise unwary heroes. If the room or corridor 
contains a secret door the hero must test against their 
Awareness skill to spot the door. Once spo8ed a Trap 
Knowledge skill test will reveal the mechanism to 
open the door. If that test is failed, the hero may 
spend an hour looking around for it; roll 1d6 - if you 
roll 1, a wandering monster has found you and you 
must roll on the Dungeon Encounter table. At the end 
of one hour examining it, roll your Trap Knowledge 
skill again with +1 bonus. You may repeat this, 
increasing the bonus up to +3 for each hour spent, but 
if you fail all these rolls you cannot open this secret 
door unless you have some other, perhaps magical, 
means to do so.
When you have discovered how to open it, roll 2d6: 
2-3 - the door opens to reveal a winding corridor, 
but it only leads to a trap - roll on Table 4.4.2 Traps 
to see what awaits you. After the trap, the corridor 
ends in a blank wall. 
4 - the door opens to reveal an ambush! A monster 
was waiting for you in a small chamber (no further 
exits) and will now leap to a8ack. Roll on the 
Dungeon Encounter table to see what avails you. 
5-10 - the door opens to reveal a corridor which 
leads to another room in this section, roll or drop 
a dice onto your map to determine which room it 
leads to. 
11 - the door opens onto a corridor which leads 
onto the next section of the dungeon. If there are 
no further sections it leads back to the outside 
world. 
12 - the door opens to reveal a small chamber 
containing a treasure chest containing 5d6gp.
Between the rooms: Corridors
Treating the spaces between rooms as separate areas 
is an optional rule. If you wish to, you can use these 
rules to see if anything happens to your hero as you 
move between the rooms on your map.
Depending on the shape of your map, you might 
decide that some rooms do not have corridors 
between them, with one room opening directly onto 
the next. Corridors are assumed to be in keeping with 
the rest of the dungeon. If the ‘dungeon origin’ roll 
indicates that you are in a sewer, the corridors will be 
sewer pipes. If the dungeon is a creature's lair, the 
corridors will be rough tunnels dug out by the 
creature and so on. Although most of the encounters 
happen inside rooms there is always a chance that 
something will happen as they move between them. 
Roll 3d6: 
3-5 - a trap has been placed here, roll on Table 4.4.2 
Traps. 
6 - this corridor contains a secret door (see below). 
7 - Part of the roof has collapsed - you must test 
against your Strength skill to clear it out or spend 
an hour working on it (if you have a pick or shovel 
you get a bonus of +3 to your Strength skill test), 
during which time a wandering monster, alerted 
by the noise, finds you. Roll on the Dungeon 
Encounter table. 
8-9 - you encounter a wandering monster, roll on 
the Dungeon Encounter table. 
10-17 - corridor is empty. 
18 - you find 1gp that someone has dropped.


--- PAGE 186 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
185
Transition Rooms
This is an optional feature which creates a break 
between the dungeon sections, giving heroes a 
chance to rest (see ‘Resting in Dungeons’) and giving 
heroes a sense of progress in the depths. They are not 
required but do add some additional flavour to the 
dungeon. As is tradition, these rooms tend to lead 
downwards, but that is also optional. If you wish the 
dungeon to be ‘fla8er’ you can change the description 
so that the way leads simply onwards, rather than 
downwards.
The transition room should be placed at the ‘end’ of 
the section. After you have created your map of a 
section of the dungeon, place the transition room at 
the place which you consider to be furthest from the 
start. Heroes may arrive here without completing all 
the rooms in the section, but they should be allowed 
to decide if they want to continue to the next section 
or finish the part of the dungeon they are already in. 
Their quest or mission may not be completed if they 
move on too quickly.  
Table 5.11 Transition Rooms 
2d6 
Transition Room
2 
Tracks in the dirt end suddenly at a wall and you are certain there is a secret door! Make an Awareness 
skill test to find the means of opening it...or try again tomorrow! (You may still rest here as normal, whilst 
you try and spot the way forward). You gain +3 bonus to your Awareness skill test for each day you 
spend carefully examining the mute rock surface. Frustrating.
3 
A chasm: use the handholds to climb (Climb skill test) or tumble down suffering 1d3 pts damage before 
you manage to pull yourself out and onto the other side.
4 
An underground channel contains rushing waters with a raft and a rope to pull it across: Make a Strength 
skill test or slip in and suffer 1d3 points of damage from the thrashing silver forms lurking in the water 
before you struggle to the other side. You may also fish here.
5 
A hideous idol sits leering at you with a large bowl held in its hands. Pay 1gp (disappears as soon as it 
goes into the bowl) or use Acrobatics skill to avoid its acid spit (1d3 Stamina damage) to move past it.
6 
A mining rig has been set-up allowing you to go down in a crude lift. Use Underground Lore skill test 
or the cage gets out of control and you crash into the ground suffering 1d3 points of damage
7 
Steps lead down into the darkness….
8 
Stairways going down..with a pressure plate that releases a swinging axe! Make a Trap Knowledge skill 
test or suffer 1d3 Stamina damage. Once the trap is released, you are aware of it and don’t need to test   
 
again to pass this point.
9 
A portal is set in a circular stone frame, its surface like ripples on a moonlit lake. Glowing runes are 
carved into the edge of the frame. Make a Magic Lore skill test  to activate the runes correctly or suffer 
1d3 stamina damage as your body is slightly mangled by the teleportation. Disturbing. A similar portal 
on the other end will take you back.
10 
The room contains a hole which is the top of a smooth sided slide which, if you are brave enough to risk 
it, deposits you further into the depths. Make an Acrobatics or Climb test or take 1d3 damage as you slam 
into the ground at the end of the slide. A Climb test is required to get back up the tube later on.
11 
A winding corridor with a number of small side chambers leads onwards. It is dry and the air is sweeter, 
refreshed by draughts of air from cracks leading up to the surface. 
12 
You come into a quiet chamber, the only sound is the gurgling of a small stream of clean water that passes 
along one side. Edible mushrooms line its course. You may refresh your supplies of water here and  
 
 
harvest two rations worth of fungi.


--- PAGE 187 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
186
General Dungeon Rules
Whilst we cannot cover every eventuality, here are 
some recommendations of how you should deal with 
various aspects of dungeoneering. Always remember 
that a dungeon is supposed to be a dangerous place 
and retreating to rest is smart, not cowardly.
Lighting
Most dungeons are underground or enclosed, so we 
assume they are not well lit unless the rolls say 
otherwise. Heroes will be expected to bring their own 
sources of lighting and keep a track of their use. 
Torches and Lanterns can be dropped or put down 
when the fighting starts - if this is done without 
warning (the hero is ambushed) then they may go 
out! If your hero has to quickly drop their light source 
roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 it has gone out and they must 
fight in the darkness. Most monsters are unaffected 
by darkness, though you should read their 
descriptions carefully to check.
Carrying a light source makes using stealth close to 
impossible - any a8empt at Sneaking whilst holding 
a torch, lantern or other light source has a -6 penalty.
Using Stealth in Dungeons
Some heroes will be happy to blunder through a 
dungeon without subtlety but many will want to 
sneak along and hope to catch the monsters by 
surprise. If a hero wishes to use stealth they can do so 
by rolling their Sneak skill versus the Awareness of 
the monsters (use their SKILL value) as a contested 
skill roll. Heroes that need a torch or light source to 
see their way around the dungeon have a -6 penalty 
to their Sneak skill if they don’t put it out first (though 
they may then struggle with the darkness).
Successfully sneaking up on a monster grants the 
hero +6 to their first combat roll and +2 to the damage 
roll if they win the round. If the monster is asleep, the 
hero only fails their Sneaking skill roll on a fumble.
Using Ranged Weapons in Dungeons
A hero that uses ranged weapons can use them in the 
first round of combat, unless they are ambushed. 
After the first round they must use melee weapons 
unless they have an ability that can create a distance 
between themselves and the monsters, or the 
monsters themselves are using ranged weapons. See 
the monster descriptions in the bestiary to decide if 
that is the case.
‘Clearing’ a Section
If a hero has visited every room and defeated every 
monster in a section of the dungeon, they can 
consider it ‘cleared’. They will no longer meet any 
wandering monsters in this section for the next 1d6+1 
days (after which various creatures will start to move 
in and repopulate it). This is obviously a very useful 
tactic to allow heroes to rest and recuperate but if this 
approach is used a careful eye should be kept on how 
many rations they have available!
Wandering Monsters
Not all the monsters stay meekly in their rooms! For 
each hour your hero spends in a dungeon you should 
roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 a wandering monster has 
discovered you - roll on the Monster Encounter table 
to see what you need to fight. You will need to 
estimate how long you have spent in the dungeon to 
work this out based on your movement, resting and 
fighting.  If you do not wish to keep a strict track of 
time, simply make a wandering monster check every 
time you stop to rest or eat.
Resting in a dungeon
Obviously, whilst resting is an important means for a 
hero to recover their lost STAMINA, it might be 
dangerous to do this in a busy dungeon! Resting in a 
normal part of the dungeon means you must roll 1d6 
every hour - on a result of 1 a wandering monster has 
found you! 


--- PAGE 188 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
187
Roll on the Monster Encounter table to find out what 
it is. If you are asleep when this happens, its first 
a8ack automatically hits for maximum damage. 
 If you are resting in a transition room (see above) you 
roll 1d6 for every four hours of rest, as these are 
places that are quieter than the rest of the dungeon.
Fleeing an Encounter
Sometimes, a hero may find that an encounter is too 
much for them and they decide to flee from combat. 
If they wish to, a hero can test their LUCK  - if they 
succeed they flee back to the beginning of this section 
and leave the monster behind (heroes of course may 
have other means of escaping, such as the use of 
magic - it's up to you to decide what works). If they 
fail the test the monster gets a free a8ack as they leave 
and combat then continues to the next round. A hero 
should find somewhere to rest after fleeing - if they 
return to the same section within eight hours the 
monster they were fighting will find them again in 
1d6 rounds!
More extensive rules about fleeing encounters are 
provided in the Chapter 3: General Play Guidance.
Example Dungeon Creation
To help you understand the ideas in this chapter we 
have included an example dungeon, split into two 
sections, showing how you can use the tables and 
advice to build and populate an ‘adventure ready’ 
dungeon for your heroes to explore.
We start by rolling for the number of rooms in each 
section and deciding on a method to create our maps. 
As this is a simple dungeon we give each section 
1d6+6 rooms (we get 8 and 10 respectively for the two 
sections) and we choose the ‘dice drop’ method to 
create our maps.
We take two pieces of paper (one for each section) 
and drop dice onto them to mark out the location of 
the rooms and connect them with doors or corridors.  
After doing this we end up with simple maps, 
preferably done in pencil so we can alter them later, 
which we can then build up into more complete 
dungeons. 


--- PAGE 189 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
188
We use the same method for both parts of our 
dungeon so the initial map for section 2 looks like 
this. At this point we could use these layouts without 
further elaboration and encounter the rooms one by 
one, using the tables to fill them with monsters, traps 
and so on, but for this example we will show how you 
can build them up into a completed design.
Now we can bring this dungeon to life using the rules 
and tables provided in this chapter. To start with we 
roll for the origin of the dungeon (Table 5.1), its 
condition (Table 5.2), the condition of its inhabitants 
(Table 5.3) and any transition rooms (Table 5.11) we 
want to include. We will do this separately for each 
section, though the dungeon origin, condition and 
monster condition can be rolled once for the whole 
structure if you wish and we can always decide to 
choose specific options instead of relying on the dice 
rolls.
Section 1
Origin: Cave. You have stumbled into part of a 
natural cave system, which has been built over as the 
city grew or gone unnoticed in the wilds. The tunnels 
and rooms are unworked and there are places where 
you have to squeeze through narrow gaps to move 
forward. The entrance is a simple opening in a 
natural rock formation. Typical rooms will be oddly 
shaped with uneven floors and ceilings. Tunnels 
wind and vary in width and may be difficult to 
squeeze along.
Condition: Overgrown. Nature has run riot here, 
with strange growths sprouting from every surface, 
tendrils and roots hanging down from the ceiling. 
This halves the distance at which ranged weapons 
can be used and in addition, if  you miss in combat 
with a melee weapon roll 1d6 - on a result of 1 your 
weapon is snared in a vine and 
you need to spend a round 
working it free unless you 
make a successful Strength 
skill test.
Monster Condition:
Toxic. 
The monsters here have some 
access to supplies of poison - 
each time you are hit by a 
weapon, take an additional 
point of damage from the 
poisons.
Transition Room: The room 
contains a hole which is the top of a smooth sided 
slide which, if you are brave enough to risk it, 
deposits you further into the depths. Make an 
Acrobatics or Climb skill test or take 1d3 points of 
damage as you slam into the ground at the end of the 
slide. A Climb skill test is required to get back up the 
tube later on.


--- PAGE 190 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
189
Section 2
Origin: Crypt - this was once a religious place used to 
house the remains of the dead. Tomb raiders have 
visited and the once carefully organised tombs have 
been broken into and pillaged. As you step forward 
you can feel bones crunching underfoot. The entrance 
is, by tradition, through either an ancient vine strewn 
mausoleum or an open grave. As this is not intended 
to be a place for the living, rooms and corridors will 
tend to be tight, narrow spaces, often decorated with 
images of death and containing shelves or nooks for 
coffins.
Condition: Consecrated - This area is located at a site 
that was once a temple of a benevolent god. If you use 
any healing magic in here, you gain an additional +1 
STAMINA points in recovery.
Monster Condition: Plagued - a foul stench fills the 
air down here and you cough and splu8er on bi8er 
spores that seem to fill the air. The creatures you 
encounter are plagued and after any combat, roll 1d6. 
On a roll of 1 you must either test your LUCK or roll 
on Table 4.3.2 ‘Diseases’.
Transition Room: (In case we wish to add more 
sections later): A hideous idol sits leering at you with 
a large bowl held in its hands. Pay 1gp (disappears as 
soon as it goes into the bowl) or use Acrobatics skill 
to avoid its acid spit (1d3 Stamina damage) to move 
past it.
At this point we make a note of these details (as they 
will affect our gameplay) and then think about the 
results of our rolls to see if we can create a story or 
theme for our dungeon. We don’t need a story for 
every dungeon but it can help us make decisions 
about what to include in the rooms. 
Based on what we have rolled so far and before we fill 
out the rooms we come up with this. ‘You have been 
approached by a priestess of Hamaskis, Sister Vesper, 
who explains that she has been searching for the 
resting place of Lady Annabelle who was a founder 
of her temple many years ago but was buried in secret 
to avoid persecution by the evil lord who ruled the 
city at that time. 
Sister Vesper has had a vision in which she saw a path 
leading down into the ground through a hidden cave 
system filled with grasping vines to a lost forgo8en 
crypt. She is far too scared to go down herself and has 
asked if you could explore on her behalf; the only 
things she wants are to find out where Lady 
Annabelle was laid to rest and see if the texts she was 
buried with still exist.’  
The extent to which you create stories or 
backgrounds for your dungeons is up to you, it may 
be that you already have something in mind before 
you start making a map. 
As noted in this chapter, if you have access to a 
number of bestiaries you can use them to create 
dungeons with specific themes (undead, demons, 
orcs & goblins and so on) and replace the random 
encounters given in Table 5.6 with more appropriate 
monsters - so instead of a finding a Wood Golem in a 
crypt, we could replace that with a Wight (both 
creatures from the dungeon level 3 encounter table). 


--- PAGE 191 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
190
Now we want to fill out the rooms of our dungeons 
and discover what details we need to add to our map. 
We use table 5.4 ‘Room Contents’ to find out numbers 
of occupants, entrance features (doorways), room 
conditions and room features, which we can then 
generate 
using 
Table 
5.6 
‘Random 
Monster 
Encounters’, Table 5.8 ‘Room Entrance Features’, 
Table 5.9 ‘Room Condition’ and Table 5.10 ‘Room 
Features’.
On table 5.4 ‘Room Contents’ some occupants are 
given adjustments to their SKILL or STAMINA, 
which you should apply to the characteristics of the 
monsters. So if the table says ‘2 occupants with -2 
STAMINA’ and your random monster is a Skeleton 
with SKILL 6 and STAMINA 5 the adjustment means 
you actually encounter two skeletons but both of 
them have STAMINA 3 instead of STAMINA 5. These 
small adjustments help to create some variety 
between encounters with the same types of monsters. 
In these notes we have made the adjustments as we 
go, so in Room 5 you can see the two Gark’s have 
different levels of SKILL and in Room 8 the two Dark 
Elves have SKILL 6 instead of the normal value of 7 
given Out of the Pit.
Section 1.
Room 1: One occupant (Great Orc SK7 ST6 A81 
OotP90), one entrance feature (Disjointed), no room 
conditions, one room feature (Side Chamber).
Room 2: Empty, One entrance features (Rubble), one 
condition (Natural Light), no features
Room 3: 2 occupants with -2 STAMINA (Skeleton SK6 
ST3 A81 OotP103) , No entrance feature, no room 
condition, no room features.
Room 4: Empty, no entrance feature, one room 
condition (Natural Light), one room features (secret 
door).
Room 5: Two occupants, one with SKILL +1 (Gark SK8 
ST10 A81 & Gark SK7 ST10 OotP56), No entrance 
feature, no room conditions, one room feature 
(Spring).
Room 6: 1d3 occupants with SKILL -1 (one Gark SK6 
ST10 A81 OotP56), two entrance features (Flimsy 
Door), no room condition, one room feature (Fungi).
Room 7: One occupant (Half Ogre SK8 ST9 A82 
BtP98), no entrance feature, no room conditions, no 
room feature.
Room 8: Two occupants (Dark Elf SK6 ST6 A81 
OotP47) with SKILL -1, no entrance features, no room 
conditions, no room features.
Corridors: Based on the map we have drawn, we can 
also roll to see what is in our corridors if we should 
wish to. Room 1 to 2 doesn’t really have much of a 
gap, but 2 to 3, 2 to 4, 3 to 5, 4 to 5, 5 to 6, 6 to 8, 2 to 7 
and 7 to 8 are all long enough tunnels that we could 
have something lurking in the darkness. 
Rolling our 3d6 eight times (refer to the text on 
corridors above) we find that the section from room 4 
to 5 will contain a wandering monster (which we will 
roll when we get there) and the section from room 6 
to 8 will contain a secret door, which we decide to 
link back to the secret door in room 4.
Bringing this all together we can now take our simple 
map of section 1 and turn it into a proper map 
showing all the details we have rolled and using our 
imagination to bring it to life.
We now repeat the same process for section 2.


--- PAGE 192 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
191
Section 2.
Room 1: 2 occupants each with STAMINA reduced by 
2 (Gnoll SK8 ST3 A81 R8P94), no entrance feature, no 
room condition, no room feature.
Room 2: Two occupants one with SKILL +1, (Giant Rat 
SK6 ST4 A81 OotP96) no entrance feature, no room 
condition, one room feature (Vicious trap - 3 points of 
extra STAMINA damage if caught - Spore Bag).
Room 3: Empty, one entrance feature (Flimsy Door), 
one condition (Clu8ered), no room feature
Room 4: 2 occupants each with STAMINA reduced by 
2 (Gnoll SK8 ST3 A81 R8P94), no entrance or room 
feature, no room condition.
Room 5: One occupant (Chameleon Serpent SK6 ST7 
A81 BtP116), no entrance feature, one condition 
(Runed), no room features.
Room 6: One occupant (Crypt Stalker SK8 ST6 A81 
OotP31) no entrance features, one room condition 
(Rat run), no room features.
Room 7: 1d3 occupants, but reduce their SKILL  by 
one (3 x Zombie SK5 ST6 A81 OotP124), no entrance 
feature, no room condition, one room feature (secret 
door - corridor to room 9).
Room 8: Empty, no entrance feature, one room 
condition (Choking Dust), no room features
Room 9: Two occupants, reduce their SKILL by one 
(Ghoul SK7 ST7 A82 OotP57), one entrance feature 
(Alcove), one room condition (Runed), one room 
feature (Secret door - leads back to room 7)
Map of section 1 of our dungeon


--- PAGE 193 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
192
Room 10: One occupant, increase its skill by one 
(Skeleton  Warrior SK9 ST6 A81 OotP103), one 
entrance feature (Alarm), no room condition, one 
room feature (Trap - Poisoned Dart).
Corridors: Using our map we roll to see if there is 
anything of note in corridors, the result of which is a 
Collapsed Ceiling between rooms 2 and 5 and 
between rooms 4 and 9 and a trap (Drop stone) 
between rooms 3 and 4.
We can now use these details to fill out our map of 
section 2 of the dungeon.
Map of section 2 of our dungeon


--- PAGE 194 ---

Chapter 5 - Dungeons
193
Making Changes and Finishing Off
Having created a dungeon using the tables to guide 
us, we can still make changes to bring it to life or give 
it a specific theme. In this case we could decide to do 
a number of things such as:
If we are creating this dungeon as a Director we 
might want to write brief descriptions of each 
room or we can invent these as we encounter 
them. The descriptions need not be very long - just 
a few sentences to explain what is seen as you 
enter.
We could replace the living monsters in Lady 
Annabelle’s tomb with undead such as zombies, 
wights or ghouls to give it a more ‘crypt-like’ feel.  
We could replace the Dark Elves in the Overgrown 
Caves with a different type of humanoid or give 
them some reason to be here (perhaps they are in 
charge of the Great Orc, Gark and Half Ogre?).
Move or swap around any monsters, traps or 
features we think are in the ‘wrong’ room - this 
shouldn’t be done simply to make the dungeon 
easier, but based on how you feel the dungeon 
should fit together.
Fix any ‘unsolvable’ problems. If, for example, we 
happen to have ended up with a heavy stone door 
on the first room and our hero has no means to 
bypass such an obstacle, we might want to make a 
small change to ensure they have some chance to 
move through the dungeon.
Furnish the dungeon - since we have humanoids 
in here, there should be some objects such as beds, 
chairs, cook pots and so on spread throughout 
these rooms and creatures might have made a bed 
or nest. Refer to the advice given in this chapter 
about monster behaviours.
Roll for treasure - we can do this as we defeat each 
monster or make all the rolls before we start and 
decide where the treasure is.
Add in anything we need for missions or quests - 
in this case we have filled out our rooms by 
random, but if we were using this dungeon as an 
objective for a mission we could choose or 
randomly pick rooms to contain important items 
or creatures.
Add in any specific items or objects that we feel 
should exist within this dungeon. For example, as 
we have created a story for our dungeon (it is the 
lost tomb of Lady Annabelle) we will put her lost 
texts and journals in a chest in the last room of the 
second section, next to a large well decorated 
tomb.
The extent to which you modify or enhance your 
dungeon is entirely up to you - it will depend a lot on 
how much time you intend to spend here and its 
importance to any quests or missions you are 
currently working on.
Descriptive text 
This is particularly useful if you are making your 
dungeon as the Director for a group of heroes. You 
don’t need to write a lot, just a few notes to explain to 
them (and remind yourself) what they see and 
experience as they come to each room or encounter. 
For obvious reasons, secret doors and traps should 
not be revealed in the text! For this dungeon we could 
start off by writing the following:
Entrance: ‘As described by Sister Vesper, just outside 
the city you find the entrance to a cave hidden behind 
a dense thicket of thorny bushes. Squeezing carefully 
past the spiky plants you can see a tunnel, choked 
with vines, leads into the darkness’.
Room 1: ‘As you move down the tunnel you can see 
that the way ahead is blocked by a steep slope rising 
up from the corridor (see the ‘disjointed’ entrance 
feature). You will have to climb or scramble your way 
up to proceed. You can also hear (Awareness skill test 
to get more details) the shuffling and grunting of 


--- PAGE 195 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
194
some creatures in the chamber ahead. You note that 
the vines from outside have worked their way into 
these caves and hang down in thick curtains 
(overgrown dungeon condition).  Once the heroes 
have managed to climb up: ‘You find yourself in a 
chamber with one smaller area to the north (Side 
Chamber room feature) and one exit, blocked by 
rubble. Facing you is a large orc (Great Orc SK7 ST6 
AT1 OotP90) with weapons at the ready! Should you 
manage to defeat him you will need to get past the 
crude rubble barrier to proceed (entrance feature for 
room 2, rubble).
Room 2: Cracks in the ceiling of this chamber allow 
some light to filter down and illuminate a vine filled 
room with four entrances, one to the east and west 
and two to the north. You have wriggled past the 
rubble (see entrance feature: rubble) blocking the 
west entrance but you note with dismay a similar pile 
of sharp rocks blocks the way east. To the north two 
narrow passages lead into the darkness.
Room 3: Ahead of you the narrow corridor widens out 
into a dark, silent, chamber. (Once the heroes move 
closer to peer in). Standing stock still in this room are 
two skeletons (Skeleton SK6 ST3 AT1 OotP103), both 
grasping rusty short swords. Their eyes glow with a 
cold blue light as they turn towards you… it seems 
you will have to fight.
Room 4: As you approach this chamber you can see a 
dusty, empty chamber faintly lit by sunlight peeking 
through holes in the roof. A corridor leads away to 
the north.
Room 5:  Ahead of you in the darkness you hear 
(Awareness test) shuffling sounds of some large 
creature. As you get closer you can dimly make out 
the forms of two humanoids (Garks) who seem to be 
gathering water from a small pool on the northern 
side of the room (Spring).
Room 6: A twisting path through the caves leads to a 
ro8ed wooden door (Flimsy Door) which you could 
use as cover as you approach. As you peek through 
you see a large humanoid (one Gark) crouching 
intently next to a patch of huge mushrooms (Fungi). 
You can also see an exit to the south which also has a 
partially broken door blocking it.
Room 7: As the corridor widens out to a large, vine 
filled, chamber you can see a number of forms in the 
darkness. At first you think they are statues but then 
you realise they are shuffling slowly through the 
hanging tendrils of vegetation (3 x Zombies).
Room 8: Peering through the darkness you see a rough 
chamber filled with darkness. As you think about 
entering you hear voices talking in a language you 
don’t recognise, though it sounds something like 
elvish (two Dark Elves).
We can make text descriptions for every room, or 
only those that have interesting elements that the 
heroes might be interested in. The extent to which 
you do this will depend a lot on whether you are 
playing a solo adventure or as part of a group and of 
course remember not to give everything away before 
the heroes have commi8ed to entering the room!
Summary
Creating a dungeon can be as complex as you like. A 
few rooms connected by corridors and filled with 
random monsters is perfectly serviceable and you 
should treat the contents of this chapter as options 
that can add depth and variety to your dungeon. For 
example, the use of transition rooms is a way of 
marking the path between one part of a dungeon and 
another, but there are other ways you could do this; a 
simple arch or unadorned corridor works just as well 
if you want to move along quickly. The best advice is 
to use the options that appeal and set the others aside 
until you need them and always remember to adjust 
the difficulty to suit your campaign.


--- PAGE 196 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
195
6 - WILDERNESSES
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to provide you, as 
either heroes or Directors, with the means of creating 
interesting 
and 
challenging 
wilderness 
environments. These rules can be used with a map 
that you have already created, or help you create one. 
As with the sections on se8lements and dungeons, it 
is advised that you consider the 
results of the tables as suggestions 
for your game and alter them to 
suit your needs.
In a world of adventure, the wilds 
are a truly dangerous place. 
Roads and tracks may be known 
to locals but will lead travellers 
astray. Maps are hard to obtain 
and 
unreliable. 
Help 
for 
wanderers, in the form of shelters 
or inns, is sparse or non-existent 
and all the while you may feel the 
hairs on the back of your neck 
prickling as a wily beast or 
ruthless bandit tracks your steps. 
Even should you find your way 
and avoid confrontation, a great 
storm can sweep across and 
freeze you to the bone. If the cities and towns are 
dangerous, the wilds are deadly.
To survive your adventures across Titan you will 
need to find your way, deal with your encounters and 
be prepared for the ever changing weather. 
A note on Skills
Throughout this section the ‘Region Lore’ skill will be 
referenced extensively. In the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy core rulebook only two types of Region Lore 
are referenced - Forest Lore and Sea Lore are 
specified, but any type of environment can have its 
own skill. Thus the full list (for the purposes of this 
book, you may add your own as required) are Plains 
Lore, Forest Lore, Hills Lore, Mountain Lore, Tundra 
& Ice Lore, Desert Lore, Jungle Lore, Marsh Lore, 
Rivers & Lakes Lore, Shorelines and Sea Lore. This is 
quite a long list of skills! At the discretion of the 
Director, you can substitute a single skill ‘Wilderness 
Lore’ which covers all of these. 
In addition, remember that these 
are knowledge special skills - a 
Hero can still use SKILL or 
MAGIC to a8empt the tests - the 
points in the special skill makes it 
more likely you will succeed, but 
an 
experienced 
barbarian 
or 
sorcerer will be able to cope with 
most 
challenges 
without 
developing all these special skills 
separately.
For the purposes of this book, 
each Region Lore skill covers a 
type of environment rather than a 
particular place. A hero with three 
points in Marsh Lore can use this 
skill in any marsh they come 
across. You may prefer the idea that Region Lore 
refers to a particular area, if so heroes must make a 
note of which part of the world they are familiar with 
when they learn the skill.
Using the Heroes Companion Rules
The Advanced Fighting Fantasy Heroes Companion 
book provides rules on creating maps for wilderness 
areas, if the player or Director prefers to use these 
rules they should do so; the tables for weather, terrain 
and encounters from this book can then be used to 
enhance the use of these maps.


--- PAGE 197 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
196
6.1 Creating your Wilderness
In this section we show you how to create a varied, 
playable map of the wilds using a variety of methods 
and options.
Finding your Way & Mapping
For the sake of building a map we divide the world 
into areas, each 10 miles across, which is a distance 
that can be covered in half a day's travel on a well 
made road. Usually when making maps of this kind, 
hexagonal or ‘hex’ pa8erns are used, but square 
pa8erns or any regular tile or grid can be used, 
depending on what you have available.
Each area on the map is assigned a type of 
environment, representing the dominant features 
you find as you traverse it. Thus an area designated 
‘Plains’ will be mostly flat or gently rolling 
grasslands, but it will still have small hills, ponds and 
maybe a river or two - very few areas will consist 
purely of one type of environment. It’s up to your 
Hero to use their skills to get across it via the shortest 
and safest path.
Unless your campaign specifies that a road or track 
exists you should assume that your Hero is working 
their way through as best they can - their speed will 
vary depending on how well they read the land. 
Travelling through untracked wilderness is very 
much slower than using a road or path!
Map Creation
There are a number of ways in which you can create 
a map of the wilderness; pick the one that best suits 
you, remembering that the rules of this book divide 
the wilderness into areas that are about ten miles 
across.
Create a map: Either on paper or a computer, this 
simple and popular method requires only your 
time and imagination. Draw a map of your 
landscape pu8ing in whichever features you 
require and then working out a scale - you can 
then divide it into hexes or squares of around 10 
miles in size.
Borrow a map: With the popularity of role playing 
games on the rise there are a huge number of maps 
available online, many for free. Choose one that 
you like and download or print it off - you can 
mark in the different areas as you go.
Use the ‘Dice Drop’ method: Described in the core 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook as a means 
of creating a dungeon, the dice drop method can 
be used also for wilderness maps by creating a 
random pa8ern which you then fill in using your 
imagination or by rolling 2d6 on the table below 
‘Table 6.1.1 Random Wilderness Generator’. A 
piece of paper, pencil and some dice are all that is 
required. Very useful when you are struggling for 
inspiration!
Use a ‘narrative’ map: For long journeys overland, 
you might want to use a narrative or story based 
map in which you decide how long your journey 
takes and what sort of terrain you cross; treating it 
as an abstract story in which your hero spends 
some time in the wilderness. For example you 
could decide that to get to their destination they 
will need to spend ten days in the forest and three 
days in the mountains before arriving - obviously, 
you still need to keep a rough map in your mind 
as to where things are if you take this approach.


--- PAGE 198 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
197
Completely Random Landscape Generation
Landscapes can be created through purely random 
generation, starting with a marked piece of paper and 
some dice. This technique works best with hexagonal 
or square lined paper.  
Firstly, pick a hex (or square) as your starting point 
and decide what sort of environment you would like 
to start in. If you are starting in a se8lement, think 
about what would be around it. A dwarven citadel 
might be surrounded by mountains whereas a 
human city could be on plains or a shoreline.   From 
this area, starting with the north most edge, work 
your way around clockwise making a roll to see what 
sort of environment is adjacent to that edge. This will 
fill out the map around you.
Repeat this process for as long as you wish to, 
depending on how far you need to travel. Remember 
that this is your map and you can apply some 
common sense, if you feel that the random generation 
does not make sense, though it is sometimes fun to 
take up the challenge of interpreting the results - a 
single mountain in the middle of a jungle could be 
home to a lost temple or hidden lair!
Hot and Cold climates: If you wish to set your map 
in an area with a hot climate, replace any Tundra & 
Ice areas with Desert and similarly, if you want your 
map to be in a cold area, replace any Desert areas 
with Tundra & Ice.
Table 6.1.1 Random Wilderness Generator - Roll for each adjacent Area
Region 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12
Plains (Pl) 
 
 
Tu 
De 
Ri 
Hi 
Pl 
Pl 
Fo 
Ma 
Ju 
Sh 
Mo
Forest (Fo) 
 
 
De 
Mo 
Ma 
Hi 
Fo 
Fo 
Pl 
Ju 
Ri 
Sh 
Tu
Hills (Hi) 
 
 
Ma 
Tu 
De 
Pl 
Hi 
Hi 
Mo 
Fo 
Ri 
Ju 
Sh
Mountains (Mo) 
 
De 
Ma 
Ju 
Fo 
Mo 
Mo 
Hi 
Ri 
Pl 
Tu 
Sh
Tundra & Ice (Tu) 
 
Ju 
Ma 
Mo 
Ri 
Tu 
Tu 
Pl 
Hi 
Fo 
De 
Sh
Desert (De) 
 
 
Ju 
Ri 
Ju 
Hi 
De 
De 
Pl 
Mo 
Fo 
Ma 
Tu
Jungle (Ju) 
 
 
Tu 
Mo 
Hi 
Ma 
Ju 
Ju 
Fo 
Ri 
Pl 
Sh 
De
Marsh & Swamp (Ma) 
De 
Pl 
Fo 
Ju 
Ma 
Ma 
Ri 
Sh 
Hi 
Mo 
Tu
Rivers & Lakes (Ri) 
 
Tu 
Mo 
Fo 
Sh 
Ri 
Ri 
Ma 
Ju 
Pl 
Hi 
De
Shoreline & Sea (Sh)  
Mo 
Tu 
Fo 
Ri 
Sh 
Sh 
Ma 
Ju 
Pl 
Hi 
De
Finding a Random Wilderness Area
If you need to designate a random 
wilderness area, perhaps as part of a 
quest or mission, it can be done by 
dropping or rolling a dice onto your map 
(if it rolls off the map, roll it again - the 
place you want is the one under the dice, 
if it se8les on a boundary line then use 
your judgement to decide where you are 
going) or by starting from a point on 
your map such as a se8lement and using 
the compass points and a random 
distance.
Table 6.1.2 Random Wilderness Area finder
The area you are looking for lies 3+1d6 areas away in the 
following direction..roll 1d6 three times.
Roll 1d6 (Reroll 5 or 6) to find a column then..
Roll 1d6 (Reroll 5 
or 6) to find a direction.  
1-2 
 
3-4
1 
 
 
 
North  
North East
2 
 
 
 
East 
 
South East
3 
 
 
 
South  
South West
4 
 
 
 
West 
 
North West
For example: If you roll a 2, followed by a 4 then a 3, the random 
wilderness area lies 5 areas away (50 miles) in the South West direction. 
A roll of 4, 2 and 2 would mean it lies 7 areas away (70 miles) to the East. 


--- PAGE 199 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
198
Permanent Features
As you travel the wilderness, you may come across 
things which are permanent - se8lements, dungeon 
entrances, campsites. This is noted in the encounter 
description. You should note these on your map as 
you create it, in general you can find (or avoid) them 
in the future by passing a Region Lore test.
Example Map
In order to help you visualise how these maps can be 
put together (and it’s entirely your decision as to how 
you want to map out your world) we have included 
an example map, showing the region around Ludria. 
It has a wide variety of environments to explore and 
one other se8lement (King’s Gap), but no other 
details have been added in case you want to use the 
map yourself. As with all maps of this type each area 
has been marked with the dominant type of 
environment, but they are all mixed to some extent, 
so as the river leads north from Ludria those areas are 
marked as ‘Ri’ meaning Rivers & Lakes, but of course 
there are also fields, small hills and glades of trees 
do8ed around. As well as being marked ‘Ri’, ‘Pl’ etc 
each area has a li8le symbol to indicate what sort of 
environment is present.


--- PAGE 200 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
199
Travelling the Wilds
Having created your map, the following section 
provides you with rules for making your way across 
it.
Travel Time
The travel time is based on traversing the wilderness, 
instead of following a known path or track. 
Assuming you survive the exposure, don’t fall into a 
crevasse or get killed by bandits the next thing to 
work out is how long it took your Hero to cross an 
area. In the environment and encounter description 
you will find tables for the travel time based on your 
route, the weather and terrain.
Known path or track: If there is a known path or 
track available the travel time is reduced to the best 
result on the Route table. You will have to decide if 
this option is available, probably based on the 
location of any se8lements, though you may also 
decide that having a road or path is part of your 
campaign se8ing. You must still roll for weather and 
encounters, but you do not roll for terrain as the path 
avoids them. 
For example: You have been asked to visit Fort Trollfear, a 
small military camp about 30 miles north of your current 
location. No one has heard from Fort Trollfear in weeks and 
they are worried something dreadful has happened. 
Because it is a known location with supplies and troops 
moving back and forth, you decide that there is a well worn 
track leading to it, so you can follow that all the way to the 
fort. Having arrived there, you find it has been a3acked and 
the small number of survivors tell you that an orc warband 
came from caves about twenty miles to the east. In this 
case, there is no reason for a path to exist and if you want 
to track down the orcs and exact revenge, your hero will 
need to navigate the wilderness.
If there is no path, when your Hero enters a new area 
make a test against their Region Lore special skill (or 
SKILL or MAGIC if you have no points in the 
relevant Region Lore). Each type of environment has 
its own associated Region Lore. A woodsman with a 
bonus in Forest Lore will not be any the wiser when 
trying to navigate in the mountains. You may also use 
the Navigation skill from the Heroes Companion if 
you wish.
If the hero succeeds very significantly (gets 4 less then 
their skill or a critical success), you find some 
unmapped trails and paths, which will lead you 
across the area quickly. If you just succeed, you will 
cross in the normal time for that environment as 
specified in the description. If you fail the roll, your 
journey will take longer - it’s assumed you don’t give 
up and turn around though that is always an option! 
The amount of extra time will vary depending on the 
environment - see the separate descriptions in the 
Route table to find out what the penalty is.
If you fail the roll badly (how much depends on the 
environment) or if you critically fail, your hero will 
get lost. This will add to your travel time and require 
you to roll again - ge8ing lost means that you make 
no progress across the terrain.
Each time you successfully traverse an area of the 
map, gain +1 to your Region Lore for that particular 
area. This increases each time to a maximum of +6 as 
you gain familiarity with that piece of territory. 
Remember that this bonus only applies to that single 
area and not to others of the same type. For example, 
D’Sta Leafshadow has one point in Region Lore - 
Forest and has criss-crossed the ‘Wolf Wood’ near 
Ludria many times, gaining +6 to his Region Lore roll 
for that area. When D’Sta travels to the ‘High Wood’ 
far to the west, he no longer has this bonus and goes 
back to rolling against his usual Region Lore skill.


--- PAGE 201 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
200
Once you have assessed your route, weather and 
terrain add these together to find out how long you 
will spend crossing this area. You should round the 
time to the nearest day - so if your total is 2 ¼ days to 
cross some hills, treat it as two days (on the second 
day you push on into the night before resting for 
example). This determines how many encounters you 
need to roll and the amount of meals you will 
consume.
Example: D’Sta Leafshadow has SKILL 7 and Region Lore: 
Forest of 1, for a total special skill of 8. He enters a new area 
of forest he wants to cross from west to east. D’Sta makes a 
test and rolls 4 on 2d6 - he has succeeded by 4! He finds an 
old woodcu3er’s trail and passes through in ½ day 
(barring weather and terrain) as indicated in the 
description for the Forest environment. Had he rolled a 7, 
he would have kept to his direction through the trees, but it 
would take him 1 day. If he had rolled an 11, failing by 3, 
he spends ½ day wandering in the forest and so it takes him 
1½  days (before weather and terrain). If D’Sta rolled a 12 
he would get lost, spend 1 day walking in circles and have 
to start again - and make another Region Lore: Forest roll. 
Before he works out exactly how long it takes him to cross 
this forest, he must roll for weather and terrain, then total 
it all together. D’Sta rolls on the weather table, ge3ing a 2 
on 1d6 for fair weather. On the terrain table he is less 
fortunate rolling a 6, indicating some broken terrain that 
takes 1 day extra to cross. Pu3ing it all together, he enters 
the forest, finds a path (with a roll of 4 against his Region 
Lore: Forest of 8) but at some point the path is interrupted 
by broken terrain, adding one day. So his travel time is 1½ 
day - which he rounds down to one day as he pushes on late 
into the evening to get across. He has to make one 
encounter roll for that day.  If he had worse rolls, it could 
have taken 2 or more days to get across this area and he 
would have to roll an encounter and weather for each day 
he spent in the forest. It may seem excessive to take 
multiple days to cross 10 miles of territory, but remember 
that this is for a hero crossing an uncharted wilderness. It’s 
tough!
Roads & Se=lements
As noted above, the travel times are based on forging 
your way through an untracked wilderness, though 
clearly roads and paths do exist in some places. You 
should feel free to add them where appropriate, 
based on your se8ing. We suggest the following 
guidelines for routes between se8lements.
Se3lement 
Suggested Routes between
City 
 
Has direct routes to all se8lements in 
its area and all adjacent areas. Routes 
to towns extend to all within two areas 
(20 miles) and routes to cities extend to 
all within six areas (60 miles).
Town  
Has direct routes to all se8lements in 
its area and other towns or cities 
within two areas (20 miles). Villages in 
adjacent areas have a 1-2 chance on 
1d6 to have a direct route.
Village 
Has direct routes to all se8lements in 
its area. Se8lements in adjacent areas 
have a 1 in 6 chance to have a direct 
route.
So if a hero has already explored part of the world, or 
knows of some se8lements, they can travel along a 
known route and get the benefit of a faster travel time 
(weather and encounters still apply).
Forced March
A hero may wish to move faster than normal pace for 
a while. You can choose to undertake a forced march, 
in which all travel times are halved but at the end of 
each day you must test against your STAMINA to see 
if you are exhausted by it. At the end of the first day, 
make the test using 2d6. On the second day, use 3d6, 
4d6 on the fourth day and so on. If you fail the test 
you have pushed to the point of collapse - you are 
exhausted and must rest without moving for one 
whole day to recover.


--- PAGE 202 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
201
If your hero has points in the Strength special skill, 
these can be included as a bonus to your rolls, so a 
hero with 2 points in Strength skill rolls 2d6-2 on the 
first day, then 3d6-2 on the second day and so on until 
they stop or collapse as above.
At the end of a forced march you may not a8empt 
another one until you have spent the same number of 
days recovering as you did marching - so if the hero 
spends three days at forced march pace they cannot 
start another one until a further three days of normal 
travel or rest have passed.
Encounters
Having an interesting encounter in the wilderness is 
far less likely than in a se8lement, but every day can 
bring some new surprises - good or bad. The 
standard number of encounters each day is one (the 
wilds may be dangerous, but a lot of time is spent 
travelling through mundane landscapes which pose 
no 
particular 
threat 
or 
opportunity). 
Each 
environment has an encounter table that should be 
rolled on for every day spent travelling through it. 
A skilled hero can use their wits and knowledge to 
shift the odds. If you choose to, you can make a 
Region Lore skill roll with a -3 penalty - if you 
succeed, you can decide to either sneak through the 
wilderness and avoid problems (have no encounters) 
or use your abilities to find all the interesting things 
you can (have two encounters in one day).
Encounters at night: It is assumed that heroes, 
however brave they may be, find sheltered and 
hidden places to bed down for the night, so there is 
no requirement to roll for a night encounter if you are 
not travelling. If you wish to increase the difficulty, 
roll for a night encounter as well as a day encounter, 
but only apply the result if it could seek you out - so 
you would encounter a Predator, but not a Crevasse - 
the Predator sniffs you out in the darkness!
Standard Encounter Options
As a reminder, in Chapter 3 we detailed a number of 
encounter options. A hero may wish to use this (or 
others they can think of) to deal with the challenges 
they face.
Table 3.1.1 Standard Encounter Options - see 
descriptions in Chapter 3 for more details
Option  
Action
Fight  
Begin combat and resolve it using the 
normal combat rules, you may use a 
ranged weapon or spell in the first 
round if you have spo8ed your target.
Flee 
 
Run from combat; test your LUCK to 
escape or suffer a ‘free hit’.
Sneak  
A8empt to use Sneaking to get past 
your target, consider what bonuses or 
penalties apply.
Talk 
 
Use a social skill, you must share a 
means of communication with your   
 
target.
Trick  
A8empt to trick your target in some 
way, a variety of means including 
magic can be used.
Bribe  
Offer your target an amount of gold to 
ignore your actions.
Feed 
 
Offer an animal food in order to 
distract it.
Travelling at Night
Most adventurers will stop and rest once the sun has 
set, but if you absolutely must push on, you can. 
However, unless you have some means of seeing long 
distances at night you are at a severe disadvantage. A 
hero or group of heroes without darkseeing, 
nightvision or a similar effect has a -6 to all 
Awareness tests to spot danger, -6 to any Region Lore 
rolls they take at night and must make a Region Lore 
test (with the -6 penalty) or find themselves lost; in 
effect they spend the night walking in circles and 
make no progress. 


--- PAGE 203 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
202
Foraging
Staying alive in the wilderness means either bringing 
your own food or finding it as you travel. This is 
covered by the Hunting and Fishing special skills. 
Using these skills takes ½ day to make a skill test, on 
a success the Hero obtains 2d6 meals. Each area on 
the map will have its own conditions that may affect 
your chance of obtaining food - see the table below. 
Any points in the Animal Lore special skill can be 
used as a bonus for this skill test. Once you’ve found 
out what the foraging conditions are for an area, 
make a note of it in case you pass back through.
Survivor Talent: A hero with this talent does not 
need to make a roll to forage for themselves and can 
gather 2 meals for every 2 hours spent foraging, as 
well as finding shelter in harsh environments where 
exposure can be a problem. They may choose to use 
their talent or make a Hunting or Fishing skill test, 
the choice is theirs.
Table 6.1.3 Hunting & Foraging
Region - roll 1d6  
Bountiful: The area is more 
Normal: Opportunities to 
Scarce: The land is bare and
once for each area  
bountiful than usual with 
find sustenance are  
 
lacking in opportunities
on your map 
 
plenty of game and water 
normal for this region.  
to find food.
Plains  
 
1-2: +2 bonus to Hunting  
3-5: No Modifiers 
 
6: Hunting and Fishing skill 
and Fishing skill tests. 
 
 
 
 
tests are at -2.
Forest  
 
1-2: +2 bonus to Hunting  
3-4: No Modifiers 
 
5-6: Hunting skill tests are at
and +1 to Fishing skill tests.  
 
 
 
-2 and Fishing at -3.
Hills  
 
1-2: +2 bonus to Hunting  
3-4: No Modifiers 
 
5-6: Hunting and Fishing
and Fishing skill tests. 
 
 
 
 
skill tests are at -2.
Mountains 
 
1-2: +2 bonus to Hunting  
3-4: No Modifiers 
 
5-6: Hunting and Fishing skill 
and +1 to Fishing skill tests.  
 
 
 
tests are at -3.
Tundra & Ice  
1: +1 bonus to Hunting and  2-3: No Modifiers 
 
4-6: Hunting and Fishing skill 
Fishing skill tests. 
 
 
 
 
 
tests are at -3.
Desert  
 
1: +1 bonus to Hunting skill  2-3: Fishing is not possible 
4-6: Hunting skill tests are at
tests, Fishing is not possible  
 
 
 
-3, Fishing not possible
Jungle  
 
1-3: +3 bonus to Hunting  
4-5: +1 bonus to Hunting 
6: Hunting and Fishing skill
and Fishing skill tests. 
and Fishing skill tests. 
tests are at -1.
Marsh  
 
1-2: +1 bonus to Hunting  
3-5: +2 bonus to Fishing  
6: Hunting skill tests are at -2.
and +3 to Fishing skill tests. skill tests 
 
 
Rivers & Lakes 
1-2: +1 bonus to Hunting  
3-4: +2 bonus to Fishing skill 5-6: Hunting skill tests are at 
and +3 to Fishing skill tests. tests and -2 to Hunting tests -4 and Fishing at -1.
Shorelines & Sea 
1-2: +1 bonus to Hunting  
3-4: +2 bonus to Fishing  
5-6: Hunting skill tests are at 
and +3 to Fishing skill tests. skill tests 
 
 
-3 and Fishing at -1.


--- PAGE 204 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
203
Exposure
In addition to the hazards of encountering beasts or 
falling into a crevasse, the wilds can kill with heat, 
cold or dehydration. For dehydration, it is assumed 
that a Hero’s rations include sufficient water to 
sustain them so no additional rules will be given 
beyond those in the AFF rulebook. Exposure to 
extreme cold or heat, often resulting from severe 
weather (weather conditions are rolled for daily) is 
worked out as a skill test as the Hero uses their 
experience and wits to avoid the climatic effects. The 
Hero must use their SKILL, MAGIC and Region Lore 
skill to pass the target number provided, or they 
suffer 1d6 points of STAMINA damage due to 
exposure. 
For example, Wyrdly Dume is crossing a desert. He rolls a 
6 for the weather and checking the table sees that a 
sandstorm has blown in with a target number for exposure 
of 14. Wyrdly has SKILL 5 and Desert Lore 1 for a skill of 
6. He is wearing desert clothing so has +2 to his roll. 
Wyrdly rolls 8 for a total of 6+2+8 = 16 - enough to beat the 
target, so he is safe from the sandstorm. Had he rolled a 3 
for a total of 6+2+3 = 11 he would have failed and suffered 
exposure, taking 1d6 points of STAMINA damage as the 
brutal heat and wind tested his endurance.
Bonuses to this test can be obtained by having the 
right equipment or magic to hand, some examples are 
as follows. Exposure to cold: Warm Clothing: +2, 
Tent: +3, Tinderbox: +2, Potion of Warming: +3. 
Exposure to heat: Desert Clothing: +2, Extra 
Waterskin: +2, Potion of Cooling: +3. Other items or 
magical effects (the minor magic spells Heat and Cool 
and the priest ability Sanctuary) can be assigned a 
bonus based on their description. In most cases a well 
equipped Hero can avoid exposure, but woe betide 
the person who ventures into the wilds without 
appropriate equipment.
Food & Drink
Rules for starvation are provided in the core AFF 
Rulebook - a hero that doesn’t eat and drink for one 
day loses 2 points of STAMINA. In this book we refer 
to ‘meals’ instead of rations, as one meal is sufficient 
to provide enough sustenance for one day or restore 
2 STAMINA. One ration provides two meals. A 
waterskin holds enough water for one day and can be 
replenished from natural sources, unless you are in a 
Desert region. Remember to take enough food and 
water for you and your mounts when you venture 
into the wilds! 
Riding vs Walking
The main benefit of riding vs walking is not speed 
(few mounts can maintain high speed for long 
distances with a rider on top and very few could do 
so without a path or trail), but the ability to carry 
extra equipment and supplies. On untracked land a 
horse or pony will not be much faster than walking, 
but it will certainly allow you to carry more food and 
items such as tents or a change of clothes. A stout 
pony is truly the wanderers’ friend. If you are able to 
cross an area more quickly by riding, it is noted in the 
environment description.
If you are fortunate enough to have a road or trail to 
follow then a mounted person can travel great 
distances on even, well maintained ground - it is not 
really possible to cover all eventualities (different 
types 
of 
mount 
and 
terrain 
have 
different 
interactions) so you will need to assess this for 
yourself. Horses can cover up to 30 miles a day at 
walking pace and more at a trot or canter, but that 
assumes they are well rested and provided with 
fodder and water. Other mounts have different paces 
and endurance - use your common sense!


--- PAGE 205 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
204
The Changing Seasons
The influence of the seasons is rather dependent on 
how you wish to play your campaign and keep track 
of time. The complexities involved would require an 
additional chapter at least which seems excessive 
when many heroes would rather treat the changing 
seasons as a ‘background effect’ rather than worry 
about them too much. If you wish to apply some 
changes, the following adjustments are suggested 
and you should feel free to add more as you see fit. 
An entire campaign played out in the depths of 
winter or the sultry heat of summer has its appeal, 
but the details require your imagination.
Seasonal Adjustments
Spring  
No adjustments.
 / Autumn:  
Summer:  
In the heat of summer add +2 to 
weather rolls in the Jungle & Desert 
locations and suffer a -3 penalty to 
exposure tests in those locations.
Winter:  
In the chill of winter add +2 to weather 
rolls in the Mountains & Tundra  
 
 
locations and suffer a -3 penalty to   
 
exposure tests in those locations. Any  
 
beasts you encounter are weakened by 
starvation and have -2 STAMINA. All  
 
foraging tests (Hunting & Fishing)   
 
have a -2 penalty.
Using LUCK whilst exploring
If all else fails, a Hero can call upon whichever gods 
happen to be watching and ask for aid. At any time, 
you may test your LUCK to find help. If you fail, 
nothing happens and you stagger on with only your 
wits to save you. If you succeed you come across a 
traveller, a friendly and knowledgeable guide that 
will help you from your current area to the next one 
you wish to explore and provide you with one day's 
worth of rations (2 meals), after which they will 
disappear. You may only test your LUCK like this 
once per day.
Hiring a Guide
If you start from a se8lement (village, town or city) or 
encounter one, you may try and hire a guide. Firstly, 
make an Etique8e skill roll to see if you can find one. 
If you fail, you can’t find anyone to help you, if you 
succeed you have found a local with sufficient 
understanding of the area to guide you in whichever 
direction you choose. The guide will stay with you 
for three areas distance from the area containing their 
home. The guide charges 5gp each day (if you don’t 
pay them, they slip away in the night). They carry 
their own rations and basic travelling gear. They will 
not fight for you. 
When you have a guide with you, you reduce your 
travel time for each area to one day. You must still roll 
for weather and encounters, but you do not roll for 
terrain (they know how to take you past the worst 
places). 
6.2 Environment Descriptions
Each type of environment will have their own 
challenges 
and 
inhabitants, 
the 
environment 
descriptions provide you with details on weather, 
navigation and encounters. Remember that each area 
is described by the landscape and vegetation that are 
dominant but none of them will be entirely uniform. 
Plains will have small lakes and rivers, mountains 
will have valleys, deserts may have stone peaks and 
oasis. As usual take what is wri8en as a base upon 
which you can create your own unique zones.
The encounters are described in section 6.3, for a list 
see Table 6.3.1 Wilderness Encounters.


--- PAGE 206 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
205
Plains (Pl)
The landscape rolls away from you in seemingly 
endless waves of green and brown. Grass ripples in 
the breeze and small glades hold out the offer of 
shade, though they also be a hiding place for all 
manner of creatures. Shading your eyes from the sun 
you survey the vista, noting a small farm in the 
distance close to where dust rises from what must be 
a wagon trail. The plains are open country often criss-
crossed with tracks and usually amongst the easiest 
places to travel but, for the same reasons, they are 
also home to hunters of many kinds. You are as likely 
to meet a wyvern as a merchant, so beware!
Route - Make a Region Lore: Plains skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: ½ day 
 
1 day (Riding: ½ day)  
Wander: ½ day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  Soft breezes and dry   
The occasional squall   
The rain falls in rolling
each day 
 
conditions ease your   
interrupts your progress,  
sheets, turning the ground
travels, making  
 
forcing you to shelter  
to mud whilst gusts of wind
walking a pleasure. 
 
as it passes. +¼  day.  
threaten to bowl you over: +½ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
day. Exposure: Cold, TN 12.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
The land is flat with short, 
Patches of bramble and  
Numerous small cracks and 
for this area (update  soft grass making walking 
shallow ponds slow your 
fissures slow you down and
your map) 
 
a pleasure. 
 
 
progress. +¼ day.  
 
force you into a torturous
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weaving path. +½  day.
Table 6.2.1 Plains Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leper Colony, 4-6 Merchant 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leper Colony, 4-6 Ghost
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Wildfire, 4-6: Campsite  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Insect Swarm, 4-6 Campsite
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
7 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Patrol, 5-6 Outlaws 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Outlaws, 5-6 Merchant
8 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Herbalist, 5-6 Blood Vines 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Pit Trap, 5-6: Blood Vines
9 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Wildfire, 4-6: Stampede
10 
Herd of Beasts 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
13 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
14 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap
15 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Merchant  
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Blood Vines, 4-6 Ghost
16 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Stampede, 4-6 Band of Pilgrims 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Pit Trap
17 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Campsite
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 207 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
206
Forest (Fo)
A deep green fills the canopy as you crunch across 
the leaves that li8er the ground, making sure to avoid 
tripping on the gnarled tree roots. You must not relax 
too much however. The leaf li8er is an excellent place 
for a predator to hide, the canopy above you provides 
another place from which to ambush and as you 
move deeper in you notice how the trees have closed 
in, and the air seems sickly. Are you sure you didn’t 
hear something rustling in the undergrowth? It might 
be time to draw your sword….  The forests of the 
world provide homes to all manner of creatures and 
people, both good and bad. They can provide you 
with everything you need to survive, but it is also 
easy to get lost amongst the endless trees
Special: There is no shortage of firewood. If you have 
the means to start a fire you can always make one.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Forest skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: ½ day 
 
1 day (Riding: 1 day)  
Wander: ½ day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  Under the canopy, the air 
Rain pa8ers through the  
The rain falls and winds howl
each day 
 
is still. +1 Awareness.  
leaves above making the  
 +½  day. No Exposure. Roll
ground slippery. +¼  day. 
 1d6 - on a 1 a branch lands   
 
 
 
 
 
on you causing 1d6 damage.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
The trees are well spaced 
The ground rises and   
The Forest is ancient and 
for this area (update  and between them it is 
falls and many trees block 
dense, forcing you to hack
your map) 
 
 even, +1 to Forest lore. 
 your way. +½  day. 
 
to make a path. +1 day.
Table 6.2.2 Forest Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Wild Boars 
 
 
 
 
 
Crevasse
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Herbalist, 4-6 Trapper  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Wildfire, 4-6 Stampede
7 
Blood Vines 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Marsh Lights, 4-6 Ghost
8 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Herd of Beasts, 4-6 Patrol 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Forgo8en Path, 4-6 Predator
9 
Outlaws 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Wild Boars, 4-6 Insect Swarm
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
13 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Merchant, 4-6 Trapper  
 
Blood Vines
14 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
15 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Camp Site  
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Camp Site
16 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap
17 
Band of Pilgrims 
 
 
 
 
Outlaws
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 208 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
207
Hills (Hi)
Cresting yet another peak, you stop to take a drink 
and find an apple in your pack. The sun is out and 
toiling up and down slopes all morning has left you 
sweating. You look around, hoping to spot a path that 
leads along the top of the ridge or the base of a valley, 
anything that will offer you a few hours of travel 
along reasonably flat ground but nothing stands out. 
The landscape is dominated by the up and down of 
rises, crests, dips, vales, knolls, elevations, fells and 
mounts, all of which you will have to labour up or 
scramble down. On their tops, they are often 
windswept and rocky with trees and bushes 
becoming more common as you descend the slopes, 
often finding a stream or small lake at the lowest 
points. It is a mixed land, full of variety.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Hills skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: ½ day 
 
1½ day (Riding: 1½  day) 
Wander: ½ day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  Dry with pleasant breezes,  
Light rain makes the  
Storm Clouds whip overhead 
each day 
 
you can see for miles from 
scrambling up and down 
deluging you 
   
 
 
the peaks. +1 Region Lore. 
the slopes tricky. +½ day. 
+½ day. Exposure: Cold TN12
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
You pick your way carefully The only way forward is to  Although the peaks are low,
for this area (update  allowing a relaxing walk. 
scramble up and down with they are steep and broken.
your map) 
 
+1 Hunting. 
 
 
li8le rest. +½ day. 
 
Make a climbing roll (TN 13) 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
or 1 day, (½ day success).
Table 6.2.3 Hills Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Crevasse, 5-6 Leper Colony 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Crevasse, 5-6 Leper Colony
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Prospector, 4-6 Trapper  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Ghost, 4-6 Insect Swarm
7 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Landslide, 4-6 Ferocious Hailstorm 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Landslide, 4-6 Ferocious Hailstorm
8 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Wild Boars, 4-6 Patrol  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Camp Site, 5-6 Wild Boars
9 
Outlaws 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Prospector, 5-6 Trapper
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
13 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Prospectors, 4-6 Pit Trap 
 
Outlaws
14 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
15 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Merchant  
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Herd of Beasts
16 
Dungeon Entrance 
 
 
 
 
Dungeon Entrance
17 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Hunting Wyvern
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 209 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
208
Mountains (Mo)
As the morning sun rises it glances off the snowy 
slopes that surround you, momentarily blinding you. 
The cold thin air leaves you gasping for breath as you 
raise your eyes to the summit, but it is hidden from 
view, shrouded by clouds that promise further 
snowfall. You are well above the surrounding lands 
but there is still further to trudge upwards in the hope 
of finding a pass through to the lands beyond. 
Special: Climbing in the mountains will afford you 
spectacular views - add +2 to your next Region Lore 
roll when you leave the mountains.
Special: The air cools as you ascend the mountains. If 
you do not have wood to make a fire you lose 2 points 
of STAMINA each day. (2 day’s wood occupies one 
slot). You can find wood by testing SKILL or Region 
Lore: Mountains to acquire 1d6 days of firewood. 
Route - Make a Region Lore: Mountains skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: 1 day 
 
2 days (Riding: 2½  days) 
Wander: 1 day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  The air is cold and clear, 
Winds and snow flurries.  
Winds howl and snow falls. 
each day 
 
with no sign of rain or   
-1 Awareness, +½ day, 
+1 day, Exposure:Cold TN 18.
  
 
 
snow.  +1 Awareness.  
Exposure: Cold, TN 14. 
Awareness -3 as skies darken. 
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once   
You can navigate via the   
Paths lead to nowhere and 
This is a hard peak of steep 
For this area    
lower slopes.   
 
rock falls block your way. 
cliffs, and icy slopes. Lose 1
(Update your map) 
+1 Region Lore. 
 
+½ day.  
 
 
day.  Make a climbing skill 
or lose a further ½ day
Table 6.2.4 Mountains Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Crevasse
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Crevasse, 4-6 Frozen Bodies 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Ghost, 4-6 Campsite
7 
Ferocious Hailstorm  
 
 
 
Ferocious Hailstorm
8 
Prospectors 
 
 
 
 
 
Outlaws
9 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Trapper, 4-6 Outlaws 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Trapper, 4-6 Prospector
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Forgo8en Path, 4-6 Crevasse 
 
Landslide
13 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
14 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap
15 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
16 
Landslide 
 
 
 
 
 
Ferocious Hailstorm
17 
Crevasse 
 
 
 
 
 
Crevasse
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
GIant


--- PAGE 210 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
209
Tundra & Ice (Tu)
Stamping your boots on the ground to get some 
feeling back in your toes you peer out from your fur 
lined hood, surveying the land ahead of you. The 
monotony of the drifting snow is broken here and 
there by a stand of pine trees or an outcropping of 
rock but the overall impression is of emptiness and 
stillness. 
Everything here has been frozen into place (yourself 
included if you are not careful) 
and whilst that makes it unlikely 
that you will face much opposition 
in your travels, it also means that 
your 
progress 
will 
be 
very 
noticeable to anything that is 
watching. 
The biggest danger in this desolate 
landscape is the land itself - ice and 
snow can hide a crevasse or pool 
and the biting cold threatens to 
drain you of the energy you need 
to keep moving. On the plus side, 
the relative flatness makes keeping 
track of any landmarks a lot easier.
Special: If an encounter requires 
you to test your Awareness skill, 
you gain a +2 bonus due to the 
sparse 
nature 
of 
your 
surroundings. It’s hard to hide on 
an icy plain. This also means your 
Sneaking skill has a -2 penalty.
Special: Out on the tundra, icy 
winds like frozen daggers cut into 
you. If you do not have sufficient 
wood to make a fire you lose 2 
points of STAMINA each day as 
the cold enters your bones. Two 
day’s worth of firewood occupies 
one encumbrance slot. 
You can forage for firewood by testing your SKILL or 
your Region Lore: Mountains skill, a success means 
you acquire 1d6 days worth of firewood. A hero with 
the Survivor talent does not need to roll provided 
they can spend 2 hours searching.


--- PAGE 211 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
210
Route - Make a Region Lore: Tundra & Ice skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: 1 day 
 
1½ day (Riding: 1½  day) 
Wander: ½  day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  The air is still and dry. 
Fogs drift across the open 
A dense fog appears only
each day 
 
The only sound is your 
land obscuring vision. 
to be replaced by a driving
   
 
 
breathing. +1 Awareness. 
-1 Awareness, +¼  day, 
storm of snow and hail.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exposure: Cold, TN 13. 
+½ day. Awareness -2.
Exposure: Cold, TN 17. 
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
Although cold, the land is 
Concealed dips full of  
The snow and ice conceal a
for this area (update  firm and flat allowing you  
drifting snow hamper  
land of sharp rocks, frozen
your map) 
 
to stride forward 
 
your passage, making  
ponds and wiry grass 
   
 
 
confidently. +1 Hunting. 
your path zig zag. 
 
tussocks hidden underfoot.
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
+½ day. 
 
 
+1 day. A miserable journey.
Table 6.2.5 Tundra & Ice Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Band of Pilgrims / Barbarians  
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leper Colony, 4-6 Ghost
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Crevasse, 4-6 Frozen Bodies 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Ghost, 4-6 Frozen Bodies
7 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Trapper, 4-6 Herd of Beasts 
 
Herd of Beasts
8 
Outlaws 
 
 
 
 
 
Crevasse
9 
Ferocious Hailstorm  
 
 
 
Ferocious Hailstorm
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
13 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite
14 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap
15 
Ferocious Hailstorm  
 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Outlaws, 4-6 Frozen Bodies
16 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
17 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Hunting Wyvern
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
GIant


--- PAGE 212 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
211
Desert (De)
Shading your eyes against the glaring sun you take a 
sip of water to get some moisture. You resist the urge 
to drink too much, knowing that it may be some time 
before you can find more. The wind whips sand into 
your face as you scan the horizon for clues about your 
journey. As you step forward there is a crunch  - 
looking down, you realise you have trodden on an 
ancient skull. It grins at you one final time before the 
sands trickle back in place, covering it for eternity. A 
grim fate awaits those who get lost in the desert.
Special: If an encounter requires you to test your 
Awareness skill, you gain a +1 bonus due to the open 
nature of your surroundings, but also suffer -1 to 
Sneaking skill tests.
Special: A waterskin will hold water for one person 
or mount for one day. If you run out of water, you 
suffer 1d6 STAMINA damage on the first day, 2d6 
damage on the next day, then 3d6 and so on. Running 
out of water in the desert is generally deadly! Camels 
can go up to two weeks without water.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Desert skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: 1 day 
 
1½ day (Riding: 1 day) 
Wander: ½  day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  The air is still and dry. 
Winds fill the air with sand.  A great sandstorm appears.
each day 
 
+1 Awareness.  
 
+¼  day, -1 Awareness,  
-3 Awareness, +¾ day.
  
 
 
Exposure: Heat, TN 14. 
Exposure: Heat, TN 16. 
Exposure: Heat, TN 14.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
The dunes roll ever on,  
The sand is soft and sliding. The dunes conceal deep 
for this area   
but they are small and firm.  Movement skills -1 due 
troughs filled with fine sand.
update your map) 
 
 
 
 
to footing.  +½ day. 
 
+1 day. Movement skills at -2.
Table 6.2.6 Desert Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Stampede 
 
 
 
 
 
Stampede
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Crevasse
7 
Quicksand 
 
 
 
 
 
Quicksand
8 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Bone Pile, 4-6 Outlaws  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Bone Pile, 4-6 Ghost
9 
Mirage  
 
 
 
 
 
Outlaws
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite
13 
The Sphinx 
 
 
 
 
 
The Sphinx
14 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Pit Trap
15 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
16 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
17 
Crevasse 
 
 
 
 
 
Ferocious Hailstorm (surprising!)
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
GIant


--- PAGE 213 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
212
Jungle (Ju)
The heat you could bear, the humidity you may 
endure but the insects are vicious and driving you to 
madness. Barely a moment passes without having to 
swat away some bloodsucking bug that wants to 
drain you of your fluids. Some of them are large 
enough to make you wonder what manner of 
creature is feeding them! Unlike the forests, the 
canopy here has not prevented a riot of vegetation 
from sprouting at every level. A tangle of creepers bar 
your path in every direction. It is almost impossible 
to move quietly and your progress is accompanied by 
the squawks of startled birds and other, more 
disturbing, grunts and growls. You are acutely aware 
of the density of life here in the vibrant green of the 
jungle.
Special: If you have 3 or more points in Climb special 
skill you can add +1 to Region Lore in the jungle as 
you scramble up a tree to survey the way forward.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Jungle skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: 1 day 
 
1½ days (Riding: 2 days) 
Wander: 1  day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  The air is humid and still,  
The rain hammers down,  
A torrential downpour
each day 
 
leaving you to sweat your  
turning soil into mud. 
hammers down. +¾ day.
  
 
 
way through.   
 
+¼  day as you slip about. 
-2 to all physical skills.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once for Although tangled the spaces There are many streams you The ground consists of 
this area (update  
between trees are generous,  have to wade. ½ day is 
massive tree roots. +1 day,
your map)  
 
allowing some respite. 
spent pulling leeches off. 
physical skills at -2.
Table 6.2.7 Jungle Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Stampede 
 
 
 
 
 
Stampede
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Herbalist, 4-6 Outlaws  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Herbalist, 4-6 Outlaws
7 
Blood Vines 
 
 
 
 
 
Quicksand
8 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leeches, 4-6 Insect Swarm 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leeches, 4-6 Insect Swarm
9 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Insect Swarm, 4-6 Swamp Gas  
Marsh Lights
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Blood Vine Roll  
1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Blood Vines
13 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
14 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
15 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Quicksand 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Leeches
16 
Marsh Lights  
 
 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Ghost, 4-6 Swamp Gas
17 
Herd of Beasts 
 
 
 
 
Herd of Beasts
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 214 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
213
Marsh & Swamp (Ma)
Your footsteps leave a trail of tiny ponds as you 
squelch across the sucking mud, carefully prodding 
ahead of yourself with a long stick to avoid the 
deepest slurries. Your boots are soaked through and 
will need to be dried by a fire soon or they will start 
to rot. The rest of your clothing is hardly in a be8er 
state - the muggy air of the marsh and your sweat 
make you feel like you are wearing a damp towel. 
The air is full of moisture. Mists and fogs drift across 
the flat landscape and surround you, making 
navigation challenging. To finish it off, dense clouds 
of midges drone mindlessly across the fetid pools and 
swarm about you, leaving you covered in itchy bites.
Special: The mud and soft ground make it hard to 
keep your footing. Combat suffers a -1 penalty and 
movement skills are at -2. Mists, rising constantly 
from the pools, create barriers to sight: -1 Awareness.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Marsh & Swamp skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: 1 day 
 
1½ days (Riding: 1½ days) 
Wander: 1  day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  The air is damp but still,  
The mists turn to constant 
 The rain falls in cold sheets.  
each day 
 
creating an eerie feeling of  
drizzle, soaking you.  
The ground is  a quagmire.
alertness. +2 Awareness. 
+¼  day as you trudge along. +½ day.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
There is enough solid  
Areas of mud and water  
Firm ground is rare and 
for this area   
ground to form a network  
force you to meander. ½ day  moving forward is tedious 
(update your map) 
of paths. 
 
 
as your path wanders. 
And slow. +1 day.
Table 6.2.8 Marsh & Swamp Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Herd of Beasts 
 
 
 
 
Herd of Beasts
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-2 Herbalist, 3-6 Outlaws  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-2 Herbalist, 3-6 Outlaws
7 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Boatman, 5-6 Blood Vines 
 
Quicksand
8 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leeches, 4-6 Insect Swarm 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leeches, 4-6 Insect Swarm
9 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Insect Swarm, 4-6 Swamp Gas  
Marsh Lights
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Blood Vines 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Swamp Gas
13 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Marsh Lights, 5-6 Quicksand 
 
Blood Vines
14 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
15 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
16 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Leeches 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Ghost
17 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Boatman
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 215 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
214
Rivers & Lakes (Ri)
Sunlight glinting off the water and the cries of water 
fowl sooth you as you approach the river's edge, 
though as you get closer a cloud of midges rises from 
the surface. The wilderness is never easy. From the 
banks you can see that the channel meanders along to 
a lake which is large enough to contain a couple of 
islands. The sounds of the river are pleasant and 
taking a drink of fresh water is a relief from the stale 
contents of your skins, but you can’t ignore the 
problem facing you: how do you get across?
Special: The travel time is based on finding places to 
ford the rivers . If you wish to, you can make two tests 
of Swimming to reduce the travel time to 1 day, but 
each failure causes 1d6 of drowning damage.
Special: You may test your LUCK to find some 
transport. If you succeed, you discover a washed up 
rowboat, just large enough to accommodate you. It 
holds together long enough to make the opposite 
shore, before falling to pieces. Reduce travel time to 1 
day, but remember to deduct a point of LUCK.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Rivers & Lakes skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: 1 day 
 
1½ days (Riding: 1½ days) 
Wander: ½  day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  A clear bright day sees 
Rain sweeps across the  
A flood! Roll Swimming.
each day 
 
sunlight glinting from the  
open water, soaking you.  
ground. +¾  day. If you fail
water. +2 Swimming.  
+¼  day as you trudge on. 
Drown for 1d6 damage.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
The rivers run swift but  
Deep channels block your 
Before you lies many 
for this area   
shallow, finding crossing 
path. ½ day as you look 
interconnected channels.
(update your map) 
points is easy.  
 
for crossing points. 
 
+2 Fishing, but +1 day.
Table 6.2.9 Rivers & Lakes Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Herd of Beasts 
 
 
 
 
Herd of Beasts
5 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Place of Rest, 4-6 Ancient Hallows
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-2 Herbalist, 3-6 Leeches  
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Leeches, 4-6 Insect Swarm
7 
Quicksand 
 
 
 
 
 
Quicksand
8 
Boatman 
 
 
 
 
 
Boatman
9 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Insect Swarm, 4-6 Outlaws 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3: Insect Swarm, Blood Vines
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
13 
Merchant 
 
 
 
 
 
Ghost
14 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
15 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite
16 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Quicksand 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Ghost
17 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Swamp Gas
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 216 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
215
Shoreline & Sea (Sh)
The sound of crashing waves and the cries of gulls 
can be heard before you push through the last of the 
bushes and see the water, stretching out from here to 
the horizon. You stumble down the beach until your 
toes are sinking into wet sand, where you stand and 
contemplate your fate. You cannot swim across, so 
how will you continue your journey?
Special: The shoreline cuts across your direction of 
travel and you must turn aside by one quarter turn (if 
you were heading north you may now go east or 
west, if you were heading east you may go north or 
south and so on). This can only be avoided if you 
have a means to cross the water, either a boat or some 
magical means. If you have access to a boat, the travel 
time is one day.
Route - Make a Region Lore: Shoreline & Sea skill test.
Succeed by 4 or be3er 
 
Normal Success 
 
Fail by 1-5 
 
 
Fail by 6+
Find a path: ½ day 
 
1½ days (Riding: 1 day) 
Wander: ½  day extra  
Lost! +1 day, try again
Region Conditions
Roll 1d6 
 
1-3: Fair 
 
 
4-5: Mixed 
 
 
6: Severe
Weather - roll once  A cool breeze ruffles your 
Winds raise spray from the  The shoreline has waves 
each day 
 
clothing as you paddle. 
water and form scudding  
surging to the high water 
fogs.   -2 Awareness.  
mark.   +½ day.
Roll 1d6 
 
1-4: Easy 
 
 
5: Tough 
 
 
6: Broken
Terrain - roll once  
A pleasant beach rises from  The shoreline is cut by  
The waters have formed
for this area   
the water creating a broad  
frequent channels and 
crumbling cliffs that slow
(update your map) 
path forwards. 
 
driftwood. + ¼ day. 
 
you. +1 day.
Table 6.2.10 Shoreline & Sea Encounter Table. Encounter descriptions are in section 6.3.
3d6 
Daytime Encounter 
 
 
 
 
Nigh3ime Encounter
3 
Young Dragon 
 
 
 
 
Young Dragon
4 
Leper Colony  
 
 
 
 
Leper Colony
5 
Band of Pilgrims / Barbarians  
 
 
Wild Boars
6 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Patrol, 4-6 Outlaws 
 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Swamp Gas, 4-6 Outlaws
7 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Merchant, 4-6 Ferocious Hailstorm 
Roll 1d6: 1-3 Patrol, 4-6 Outlaws
8 
Quicksand 
 
 
 
 
 
Quicksand
9 
Boatman 
 
 
 
 
 
Boatman
10 
Predator 
 
 
 
 
 
Predator
11 
Monster! 
 
 
 
 
 
Monster!
12 
Homestead 
 
 
 
 
 
Homestead
13 
Hunting Wyvern 
 
 
 
 
Insect Swarm
14 
Se8lement / Ruins 
 
 
 
 
Se8lement / Ruins
15 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite 
 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Forgo8en Path, 5-6 Campsite
16 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Quicksand 
Roll 1d6: 1-4 Dungeon Entrance, 5-6 Ghost
17 
Leeches 
 
 
 
 
 
Marsh Lights
18 
Giant  
 
 
 
 
 
Giant


--- PAGE 217 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
216
6.3 Wilderness Encounters
Travelling through the wilderness should mean more 
than simply bumping into wandering monsters 
(though that should happen occasionally). These 
encounters aim to bring the wilds to life by offering 
more than just random combat.
Table 6.3.1 Wilderness Encounters.
W1 
Stampede 
 
W21 
Boatman
W2 
Crevasse 
 
W22 
Se8lem/Ruins  
W3 
Ferocious Hailstorm W23 
Blood Vines
W4 
Place of Rest  
W24 
Landslide
W5 
Pilgrims / Barbarians W25 
Wildfire
W6 
Homestead 
 
W26 
Pit Trap
W7 
Merchant 
 
W27 
Ghost
W8 
Hunting Wyvern 
W28 
Campsite
W9 
Herd of Beasts 
W29 
Wild Boars
W10 
Ancient Hallows 
W30 
Insect Swarm
W11 
Herbalist 
 
W31 
Prospectors
W12 
Trapper 
 
W32 
Frozen Bodies
W13 
Predator 
 
W33 
Bone Pile
W14 
Monster! 
 
W34 
Leeches
W15 
Outlaws 
 
W35 
Swamp Gas
W16 
Patrol  
 
W36 
Dungeon 
W17 
The Sphinx 
 
W37 
Giant
W18 
Forgo8en Path 
W38 
Mirage
W19 
Marsh Lights  
W39 
Leper Colony
W20 
Quicksand 
 
W40 
Young Dragon
W1 Stampede
You are trudging along through some unremarkable 
scenery when you start to hear a strange noise. At first 
you ignore it, thinking it to be some nearby stream or 
brook of no consequence, but the noise starts to grow 
louder and louder.   As panic starts to set in you look 
around and notice a cloud of dust and commotion 
approaching you - it’s a stampede of giant ants! 
Something, somewhere has set these creatures in 
motion and now they are rushing across the ground 
trampling and tearing at everything in their path. 
Unless you have some magic to get you out of the 
way you are going to have to dash to get out of their 
way! Firstly, make an Awareness skill test to see how 
far away the stampede was before you noticed it. 
Next, make a Strength or Acrobatics skill roll to dash 
out of the way of the stampede. If you succeeded in 
your Awareness skill test you get a +3 bonus to this 
test. If you succeed, you have managed to find a place 
of safety in time and watch in awe as the stampede 
passes you by. If you fail your skill test you are 
caught in the stampede. You are bashed about, 
knocked over and struck by the biting jaws of the ants 
as they pass by. Roll a d6. The result tells you how 
many times you must roll as if you had been hit by a 
mace! If you survive you are ba8ered and bruised but 
may continue with your adventures.


--- PAGE 218 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
217
W2 Crevasse
With a great rumbling and a sound like a thousand 
thunderclaps, a great rent opens in the ground before 
you! Firstly, you must roll against Acrobatics (or 
Riding if mounted) to avoid tumbling down - if you 
fail, take 1d6 damage as the ground threatens to 
swallow you up. When you recover you see that deep 
fissures now stretch away for some distance to either 
side, still quivering stone cracks with crumbling rock 
walls. You must choose to either work your way 
around this obstacle (add ½ day to your travel time) 
or climb down and up the other side. If you wish to 
try and cross the crevasse, test against your Climbing 
skill - you must succeed twice (once to climb down 
and once to climb out the other side). Each failure 
sees you slither and fall down the rough stone, 
suffering 1d6 points of STAMINA damage.
Feature: The crevasse should be noted on your map, 
you can find or avoid it in the future with a successful 
Region Lore skill test.
W3 Ferocious Hailstorm
For a moment there is a stillness in the air and then a 
crack of thunder. Seemingly out of nowhere the sky 
darkens and roiling black clouds appear. Is this really 
natural or some magical trick? As you ponder that 
question a ferocious hailstorm commences! Ice balls 
the size of apples crash down, pummeling the 
ground and anyone unfortunate enough to be caught 
without shelter. You must test your Awareness skill 
to find a place of shelter. If you fail, you take 2d6 
points of damage as you are smashed about the head 
and shoulders by massive pieces of hail (armour rolls 
apply). In addition, if you have any mounts or pack 
animals you must make a Riding or Animal Lore skill 
test or they bolt - it takes you half a day to retrieve the 
shivering animals. The hailstorm passes with the 
same eerie swiftness with which it arrived; after no 
more than ten minutes you are free to continue your 
journey. If you need to, the hailstones can be collected 
and melted into drinking water.
W4 Place of Rest
Cresting a small ridge you come across a sight which 
gladdens your heart. Before you lies a place of rest (an 
oasis in the desert, a sylvan glade in the forest and so 
on) where you can recover for a while. Resting here 
restores 1 STAMINA (even without sleeping). You 
may refresh your water and foraging here provides 
you with 2 meals of rations, without needing a skill 
test. Restore one LUCK for discovering this place. 
Feature: The Place of Rest should be noted on your 
map, you can find or avoid it in the future with a 
successful Region Lore skill test. You only restore one 
point of LUCK on your first visit.
W5 Band of Pilgrims / Barbarians
There are many noises you might expect to hear in 
the wilderness, but singing is not one of them. 
Peering ahead you can see a band of travellers 
moving across your path, dressed in unusual clothing 
and moving in a naturalistic, almost dancelike way. 
They are playing instruments and singing or 
chanting in a language you don’t recognise. They 
don’t seem to have seen you yet. What do you do? 
● This is clearly a trap of some kind. Warily you edge 
around keeping a distance and carry on your way. 
● Come a bit closer and talk to them for a while. Roll 
1d6 - on a 1-3: You discover that they are pilgrims 
travelling to a festival of some sort and are happy to 
share some information. Add +1 to your next Region 
Lore roll. You may also join them for a while, going 
along with the party for the rest of day. They provide 
you with 2 meals worth of food but this costs you half 
a day of travel. On a 4-6: You discover they are 
barbarian nomads and you have intruded on their 
territory - one of their warriors steps forward and 
challenges you. Barbarian SK 7, ST 10 Weapon: Ba8le 
Axe Armour: Leather Hauberk. They will concede the 
fight once reduced to 3 STAMINA or less - if you 
accept they offer you 2 meals as a token of respect, if 
you continue the fight the others flee your wrath.


--- PAGE 219 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
218
W6 Homestead (Abandoned, Inhabited).
Roll 1d6  
 
        Inhabited         Abandoned
Plains (Pl), Hills (Hi),   
1-4 
 
5-6
Forest (Fo)
Rivers & Lakes(Ri),   
1-3 
 
4-6
Jungle (Ju), 
Shoreline & Sea (Sh)  
1-2 
 
3-6
Mountains (Mo), 
Marsh & Swamp (Ma) 
1 
 
2-6
Desert (De), 
Tundra & Ice (Tu)
With li8le warning you come across a lonely 
building, a single storey house of stone and timber 
with a small wood fenced animal pen on one side and 
a garden on the other. 
If the homestead is abandoned, although it is 
rundown and partially ruined you can use this as a 
sheltered place of rest to camp in. 
If it is inhabited you see a tough, weatherbeaten man 
standing at the doorway awaiting your approach. He 
is gripping a well worn farm implement and keeping 
a careful eye on you, but he says nothing. At the 
window of the house you can see a woman and a 
couple of dirty-faced children also watching you 
silently. It’s clear that they are not accustomed to 
visitors. What do you do? 
● You’ve no need to disturb them. You wave a hand 
in greeting then walk around, keeping your distance. 
● Holding your hands out to show you mean no 
harm. You approach and introduce yourself. Make a 
test against your Etique8e skill with +3 if you are 
human. If you succeed, they decide you are friendly 
and invite you into their small home for a meal. In 
addition, you can purchase up to 6 meals at 2gp each 
and the homesteaders provide you with detailed 
local knowledge, adding +2 to your next Region Lore 
roll. 
They will also allow you to rest here overnight, but 
only for one night. If you fail the Etique8e roll, the 
farmer is not convinced and tells you to be on your 
way. You can try again if you pass this farmstead 
another time on your travels. 
● There is no law in the wilderness, and you’ll take 
what you need by force! Pretending to be friendly, 
you approach the farmer and then suddenly a8ack! 
He is not surprised and defends himself wildly. 
Homesteader SKILL 7 STAMINA 10 Weapon: 
Polearm, Armour: Leather Cuirass. He adds +1 to his 
damage roll in fury at your a8ack on his home. As 
you fight, his wife and children pick up everything of 
value in the home and flee - they are gone and hidden 
by the time you are done. Inside the home you find 2 
meals worth of food. If you pass back through this 
area, the farmstead will be an abandoned ruin. 
Feature: The Homestead should be noted on your 
map, you can find or avoid it in the future with a 
successful Region Lore skill test. If it is inhabited, 
your previous behaviour will be remembered!


--- PAGE 220 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
219
W7 Merchant
Rumbling along a narrow track that crosses the 
landscape before you comes a covered wagon pulled 
by a shaggy maned heavy horse, being led along by a 
middle-aged woman dressed in travelling clothes 
and well worn leather boots. Upon seeing you she 
pulls the horse to a halt, retrieves a crossbow from the 
front seat of the wagon and holds up a hand in 
greeting. With the crossbow held nonchalantly at her 
hip, pointing away from you, she seems to be not 
unfriendly but simply wary of a stranger on the road. 
What do you do? 
● You’ve no need to bargain for wares at this time. 
You nod your head in greeting and move on. 
● Bartering is a welcome distraction from trudging 
along in the wilds. You return her greeting and, being 
sure to keep your hands away from your weapons, 
approach and ask if she has anything to trade. She is 
mostly carrying skins and ores (neither of which has 
been refined) but she is willing to sell rations or any 
item of ‘general equipment’ for twice the usual 
village cost. She will buy up to 100gp worth of items, 
paying one quarter of their usual value (any items not 
on the general equipment list can be sold for 2d6sp or 
3d6sp with a successful Bargain skill roll - she has 
Bargain skill 6). 
● A merchant alone on the road? What a prize! You 
stifle a grin and move towards her, but she senses 
your intentions! Merchant SKILL 6 STAMINA 13 
Weapons: 
Crossbow, 
Short 
Sword. 
Armour: 
Chainmail Hauberk. As you move to a8ack she will 
fire her crossbow and leap onto the wagon, yelling a 
command to her horse which is well trained enough 
to charge forward. You may fight her for three rounds 
before the merchant escapes on her wagon. If you do 
defeat her, you can recover 4d6 meals and 4d6gp 
worth of trade goods. The ores and skins are of no use 
to you without her contacts. The horse and wagon are 
yours to do with as you will, but cannot be taken 
directly across untracked country.
W8 Hunting Wyvern
Whilst most of the dangers in the wilds are lurking 
close to the ground, the seasoned traveller will also 
keep an eye on the skies above. You have the 
misfortune of being spo8ed by a young wyvern out 
looking for a meal. Firstly, you must test your 
Awareness skill. If you succeed you hear its plaintive 
cry some time before it swoops and you are ready to 
face it. If you fail the test, its first a8ack is made with 
the advantage of surprise (+6 to its combat roll and +2 
to the damage roll).
Hunting Wyvern 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
14 
Weapon:  
See description. 
Armour:  
Monster Medium. 
The wyvern a8acks by grabbing its target in its 
talons, hauling it into the air and dropping it onto the 
ground. It will a8empt to do this 1d6 times (roll at the 
start of the combat and make a note of it) before 
giving up and looking for an easier target. 
Each time the wyvern wins a round of combat you 
are grabbed in its claws and flicked up into the sky, 
before crashing to the ground and suffering 3d3 
points of STAMINA damage. A successful Acrobatics 
skill test reduces this to 1d3 points of damage. If you 
survive the 1d6 a8empts the wyvern gives up and 
flies on. If you kill the wyvern, it can be butchered to 
provide six meals worth of tough but edible food.


--- PAGE 221 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
220
W9 Herd of Beasts
Wherever you are in the world, you will find 
predators and prey. In this case you have come across 
a herd of the la8er - bison on the plains, goats in the 
mountains, horses in the hills and so on. They are 
wary but these are wild animals that aren’t familiar 
with people and their weapons. If you wish to, you 
can use your Hunting skill (or SKILL if you have no 
points in Hunting) to try and bag some food. Roll 2d6 
and add your skill, then deduct 9, or deduct 6 if you 
have a ranged weapon. This is how many days of 
rations you are able to harvest from a combination of 
trapping and martial skill. This takes half a day of 
effort, if you wish to spend that time. At the end the 
herd has moved on from your direction of travel.
W10 Ancient Hallows
Without really noticing, you have stumbled into a 
circle of ancient stones, some sort of religious or 
spiritual site that’s been long abandoned and left to 
nature. Most of the stones have fallen and only by 
looking carefully can you make out their shapes 
under layers of soil and vegetation. For all its 
decrepitude a sense of deep calm steals over you and 
you feel that it would be safe to rest here. 
If you forage in this area you gain a bonus of +2 to 
your skill rolls. If you have the Religion Lore or Magic 
Lore skills, or Second Sight, you can meditate here for 
an hour and receive a vision of the land from its 
ancient inhabitants. They will show you the land as it 
used to be, but this still helps you in your current 
journey - gain +2 to your Region lore skill for this 
area. Feature: 
The Ancient Hallows should be noted on your map, 
you can find or avoid it in the future with a successful 
Region Lore skill test.
W11 Herbalist
Waist high in a patch of brambles you spy a woman 
dressed in stout outdoor clothing and wearing a 
broad brimmed hat to keep off the sun and rain. She 
is picking at the plants about her, evidently looking 
for something. As you approach she notices you and 
stops her foraging. You notice that she does have a 
heavy looking cudgel at her side. What do you do? 
● Wave a greeting at the woman and leave her be. 
Move on with your adventure. 
● Approach and strike up a conversation. Make an 
Etique8e skill test - if you fail, so does the 
conversation and you decide to move on. If you 
succeed, the Herbalist will offer to sell you a Curative 
Salve for 30gp and freely gives you some help with 
directions (gain +1 to your Region Lore skill). 
● A lone woman out in the wild? You draw your 
sword and advance - she gives a shriek of anger and 
pulls a large potion bo8le out from her clothing. 
Before you can stop her, she quaffs it down in one 
gulp and disappears in a puff of green smoke! 
Stunned, you move forward and examine the area - 
poking about in the bushes, you see she dropped a 
gourd of strange liquid in her haste to escape you. But 
what is it? If you take it, record it as ‘Unknown Salve’. 
Should you wish to use it, roll 1d6. On a 1-2 it is 
poison and causes 1d6 points of damage. On a 3-6 it 
is a curative and restores 1d6 points of health. If you 
have the Healing or Herbalism skills, you can make a 
test to identify it before you use it.


--- PAGE 222 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
221
W12 Trapper
Making his way across the landscape you spy the 
lone figure of a man, dressed in furs and leathers he 
carries a large pack on his back festooned with a 
variety of implements and outdoors gear. Noticing 
you he stops and waves at you, though you notice his 
other hand moves to rest on the hilt of a sword. What 
do you do? 
● It seems he doesn’t want to talk - you nod and, 
keeping your distance, move on with your travels. 
● Approaching slowly you greet him and try to start 
a conversation. Test your Etique8e skill - if you fail, 
he gives li8le response and moves away from you. 
Eventually you give up and continue as you may. If 
you succeed, you convince him to stop for a while 
and talk. He is a trapper, out in the wilds hunting for 
animals to skin. He has li8le to trade but is 
knowledgeable about the area and can give you 
directions - gain +2 to your next Region Lore roll. 
● This looks like a chance to wet your blade: You 
draw your weapon and advance. The man seems 
unsurprised, he spits on the ground and pulls out a 
wicked looking sabre. 
Trapper 
SKILL 
 
7 
STAMINA 
9 
Armour: Leather   
                Hauberk. 
Weapon: Sword. 
If defeated, he 
has 1d6 days of 
rations 
and 
2d6gp worth of 
skins. 
W13 Predator
In every wilderness there are predators and some of 
them are bold enough to hunt for man-flesh. In the 
mountains, a lion might stalk across the rocks, 
waiting for the moment to pounce. On the plains 
hungry wolves lope easily across the miles, patrolling 
their range, always alert for the scent of prey. The 
type of predator will depend on the environment, but 
the broad nature of the encounter is always the same 
- you are being hunted, and must fight or become just 
another victim of the wilds.
The predator will try to use their territory to their 
advantage - make an Awareness test with a penalty of 
-3 to spot them coming. If you fail the test they gain 
+4 to their combat roll on the first round as they take 
you by surprise!
The type of beast you face depends on the 
environment.
Plains & Forest (Cold Climate): 
Grey Wolf 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:   
Small Bite 
Armour: 
 
None.
Plains & Forest (Hot Climate): 
Lion 
SKILL  
 
7 
STAMINA   
8 
Weapon:   
Large Bite 
Armour:   
None.
Hills & Mountain (Cold Climate): 
Brown Bear 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:   
Large Bite 
Armour:   
Monster Light.


--- PAGE 223 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
222
Hills & Mountain (Hot Climate): 
Giant Lizard 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:   
Large Bite 
Armour:   
Monster Medium.
Desert: 
Giant Beetle 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Weapon:   
Small Claw 
Armour:   
Monster Medium.
Tundra & Ice: 
Polar Bear 
SKILL  
 
8 
STAMINA  
12 
Weapon:   
Large Bite, Large Claw 
Armour:   
Monster Light.
Rivers & Lakes: 
Giant Crab 
SKILL  
 
5 
STAMINA  
11 
Weapon:   
Small Claw x 2 
Armour:   
Monster Heavy.
Jungle & Marsh: 
Giant Snake 
SKILL  
 
7 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:   
Small Bite  
Poison (1d3  dam)
Armour:   
Monster Light
Shorelines & Sea: 
Great Sea Eagle 
SKILL  
 
8 
STAMINA  
7  
Weapon:   
Medium Bite 
Armour:   
None.
W14 Monster!
What’s that coming over the hill? Yes, it’s a monster. 
And it may not be coming over the hill, but might be 
swooping out of the sky, bursting from the ground or 
appearing out of thin air. 
There are a number of ways you can find a monster to 
fight whilst on Titan. The most obvious is to use the 
encounter tables in one of the published bestiaries, 
‘Out of the Pit’, ‘Return to the Pit’ and ‘Beyond the 
Pit’ which contain a variety of monsters divided by 
environment. 
For the sake of variety it is recommended you use as 
many of the bestiaries as you have available, though 
note that the encounter tables are not divided by 
difficulty, so be prepared for a challenging fight and 
remember to read the monster description fully so 
that you understand what you are facing.
If you do not have them available you can use the 
Predator 
encounter 
(W13) to quickly find an 
opponent or you can 
create 
a 
completely 
random monster. The 
table below will allow 
you to generate an 
opponent, which might 
be easy to fight or 
extremely difficult as its 
characteristics 
are 
based on the SKILL (or 
MAGIC) 
and 
STAMINA of your hero. 
Roll badly and you 
could be facing a very 
powerful 
creature 
indeed.


--- PAGE 224 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
223
Table 6.3.2 Random Monster Generator. Roll Separately for each trait to build up a monster.
  
* Weak Monster - subtract 2 from the 2d6 rolls for A8acks, SKILL, STAMINA, Weapon & Armour
  
* Strong Monster - add 2 to the 2d6 rolls for A8acks, SKILL, STAMINA, Weapon & Armour
Type - 1d6 
 
2-5:  
Humanoid
6-8:  
Beast
9-10:  Undead
11:  
Demon
12:  
Other (elemental, construct etc)
Move - 1d6 
 
1-4:  
Walks or runs
5:  
Flying
6:  
Burrowing/Swimming
Intelligence - 1d6 
1-3:  
Low
4-5:  
Moderate
6:  
High
A=acks - 2d6  
2-8:  
1 A8ack
9-10:  2 A8acks
11-12:  3 A8acks
SKILL* - 2d6  
2-4:  
-3 SKILL
5-8:  
-2 SKILL 
9-10:  -1 SKILL
11:  
Same SKILL
12:  
SKILL+1
STAMINA* - 2d6 
2-4:  
-5 STAMINA
5-8:  
-3 STAMINA
9-10:  -1 STAMINA
11:  
Same STAMINA
12:  
STAMINA+2
Weapon - 2d6  
2-7:  
Small Bite/Claw
8-10:  Large Bite/Claw
11-12:  Very Large Bite/Claw
Armour - 2d6  
2-7:  
Monster Light Armour
8-10:  Monster Medium Armour
11-12:  Monster Heavy Armour
*Use the SKILL and STAMINA of the hero as the base number. For magic using heroes, use their MAGIC score instead of 
SKILL. So a hero with SKILL of 7 who rolls a 9 on 2d6 faces a creature with SKILL 6 (i.e. their SKILL minus one).


--- PAGE 225 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
224
W15 Outlaws
You’ve been spo8ed by a pair of outlaws, bandits that 
roam the wilderness looking for victims far from the 
relative safety of civilization. 
They are desperate men and not interested in parley 
- they have been watching you and have now set an 
ambush, do you spot them or will they get the drop 
on you? 
Firstly, make an opposed test against their Sneaking 
skill of 8, using your Awareness skill. If you succeed 
you have spo8ed them lurking behind a nearby 
mound of earth, but if you fail they gain the 
advantage of surprise in the first round, after which 
combat proceeds as usual. You must fight both 
Outlaws at the same time.
Outlaws (both) 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:   
Spear 
Armour:   
Leather Hauberk. 
The outlaws have a knapsack containing enough food 
and water for four days of travel and 50’ of rope.
W16 Patrol
Although most nobles don’t bother with sending out 
troops to patrol, a few of the more vigorous like to 
send some men out to keep their lands clear of 
bandits and monsters. These are usually low ranking 
conscripts, drawn from the peasantry, carrying out a 
number of days duty required by their lord and 
heavily armed adventurers are something they will 
be keen to deal with peacefully. They are armed and 
armoured but will only be carrying a day’s worth of 
rations, as this type of patrol will be operating on an 
established 
route 
between 
se8lements 
or 
homesteads. 
Conscript (5 in a patrol): 
SKILL  
 
5 
STAMINA  
7 
Weapon:   
Spear, Shortbow
Armour:   
Leather Hauberk 
If you do a8ack them, you must fight all five of them 
at once.  What do you do? 
● You greet them and exchange a few pleasantries 
before moving on. You’ve no need of help today. 
● Smiling warmly you come over and make 
conversation, asking them about the land and seeing 
what help they can give you. Make an Etique8e skill 
test. If you succeed they are happy to talk - gain +2 to 
your next Region Lore roll for this area and if you are 
lost you may make a roll immediately as they set you 
right. If you fail the etique8e test, they are suspicious 
and surly, asking you to move on and cause no 
(more) trouble. 
● Pu8ing on your most heroic demeanour, you 
a8empt to recruit them. Make a test of Leadership 
skill - if you succeed, they agree to travel with you 
and act as your guide until you leave this area! You 
gain +3 to Region Lore rolls whilst they are with you 
and they will fight alongside you if needed. If you 
fail, they are unimpressed and remind you that you 
are not their lord or master, so be on your way.


--- PAGE 226 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
225
W17 The Sphinx
Coming around the edge of an outcropping of stone 
you are amazed to see the statue of a sphinx, carved 
from an enormous block of stone, its ancient 
weathered 
face 
staring 
solemnly 
across 
the 
landscape. As you look up at its worn features, a deep 
and somewhat menacing voice speaks directly into 
your mind. ‘You have found the sphinx, mortal, and 
now must choose. Will you answer my riddle or not? 
A great reward is given for the right answer, but the 
wrong answer is..painful’. 
You may ignore the offer and continue, or a8empt to 
solve the riddle. If you make the a8empt, choose five 
different Lore skills and make five separate skill tests. 
For each success, pick a number between 1 and 6. 
Once you have made your five rolls, roll 1d6. If the 
number rolled is one of those you picked, you have 
answered correctly and receive the Sphinx’s reward. 
If you roll a number you didn’t choose, mocking 
laughter fills your mind and a blast of energy shoots 
from the eyes of the Sphinx causing 2d6 points of 
STAMINA damage!
The reward for success is a chest full of coins and 
jewels, worth 10d6 gold pieces, which appears at 
your feet with a flash of magic.
You may a8empt to answer the riddle of the Sphinx 
once each year, should you wish to return. Feature: 
The Sphinx should be noted on your map, you can 
find or avoid it in the future with a successful Region 
Lore skill test.
W18 Forgo=en Path
By great fortune you have stumbled upon an ancient 
path that is going in your direction! It is cut into the 
ground so was hidden from view until you were right 
upon it, but once you stumble down the crumbling 
banks you can see that though it is overgrown and the 
cobbles have been pushed aside and turned over by 
bushes and plants, it is still a far easier route than 
marching through the wilderness. Your travel time 
for this area is now one day (regardless of what the 
usual travel time is for this environment). You may 
restore one point of LUCK for finding it and if you 
return to this area you can find and use it again 
(though you don’t restore LUCK again). Feature: The 
Forgo8en Path should be noted on your map, you can 
find or avoid it in the future with a successful Region 
Lore skill test.
W19 Marsh Lights
Your eye is caught by an odd shifting glow. As you 
try to focus on it, you see a shimmering swarm of 
green and blue lights, as if you are looking at distant 
torches seen through the bo8om of a bo8le. A feeling 
of drowsy indifference creeps upon you as you start 
to walk in their direction as part of your mind 
screams danger! The Marsh Lights are drawing you 
in! Test your LUCK. If you succeed you wrestle back 
control of your will and turn away, shivering, to 
continue your journey. 
If you fail you stagger unthinkingly towards them, 
u8erly distracted. The lights lead you into a pool of 
water and you start to drown - test your LUCK again. 
If you succeed the shock of the cold water brings you 
to your senses and you can scramble out of the water 
and turn away. If you fail, you suffer 1d6 points of 
damage as you inhale mucky water. You must test 
your LUCK again each round until you succeed or 
die from drowning. You may, with a great effort of 
will, expend three points of LUCK to regain control of 
yourself and from this deadly peril.


--- PAGE 227 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
226
W20 Quicksand*
By ill-chance, you have stumbled into a large area of 
quicksand! What you thought was merely soft 
ground is now treacherously sucking you down, a 
sudden lurch and you are up to your waist and 
sinking fast. You can try to get out by cunning or 
brute force. If you wish to haul yourself out, test 
against your Strength skill - you must achieve three 
successes to get out. Each time you fail, you suffer 
1d3 points of damage (no armour or dodge) as the 
ground squeezes the life out of you. Alternatively you 
can stay calm and try to work out a means to get back 
to safe ground - test against your Trap Knowledge 
skill. Again you must succeed three times to escape 
and each failure costs you 1d3 points of damage.
*In the desert or other dry places, the quicksand is a dust 
trap - extremely fine, dry sand that has collected in a 
hollow and is covered by a thin layer of packed sand that 
disguises the threat.
W21 Boatman
Drifting lazily along is a small but sturdy looking 
boat crewed by a shaggy haired man dressed in 
waterproof leathers. He is sat in at the rear of his craft, 
with a fishing pole in hand. He is close enough that 
you could hail him if you wish. What do you do? 
● Watch silently and let him pass, you’ve no need for 
his assistance today. 
● Hail him and wave, asking him to come over so you 
can talk. He folds the sail and steers his craft near to 
talk. Make a Bargain roll. If you succeed he agrees to 
take you across the water for a fee of 5gp. If you fail, 
he demands 10gp for his services. If you are willing to 
pay his fee, you reduce the travel time for this area to 
one day - the boatman is very familiar with the fastest 
routes. He is not able to carry large loads (such as 
wagons) so if you have these, you must leave them 
behind if you wish to travel by boat. If you wish to 
take a horse or mule on his boat, you must pass a 
Riding test to coax your beast on board. 
W22 Se=lement / Ruins
You’ve come across either a se8lement of some kind, 
one that was seemingly unknown to other people in 
this area, or at least the ruins of one. Firstly you must 
decide if it is appropriate to find a se8lement - if you 
have sent your hero off on a journey through the 
trackless desert, you may not want them to find a 
small well run town, so in that case treat it as Ruins 
and use the ‘Place of Rest’ encounter instead. If you 
can’t decide, roll 1d6 - on 1,2 or 3 it is a Ruin (use the 
Place of Rest encounter) and on a 4,5 or 6 it is an 
inhabited se8lement. 
Now must roll 2d6 to see what kind of place you have 
come across: 
2-8 - village
9-11 -  town 
12 - city
Having discovered this place, you must decide what 
you wish to do. You may use the rules provided in 
this book to generate a fully fledged se8lement, but if 
you only want to make a brief stop you can assume it 
has the Temple, Inn and Marketplace locations 
available to make use of. Either way, give it a name 
and mark it on your map - you can return here if you 
come this way again later without making a Region 
Lore roll. Finding a se8lement of any kind means that 
you can treat this area as having paths and tracks 
available, reducing the travel time to one day (the 
locals are willing to give at least rough directions 
when asked). You may also hire a guide here: See the 
rules at the start of this section.
Special: Once you have found a se8lement in an area, 
if it is a town or city any other se8lements found 
nearby will be villages. If you find a city, there will 
not be a city in any adjoining wilderness areas (unless 
you require one for your campaign).


--- PAGE 228 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
227
W23 Blood Vines
Carelessly you have strolled into a patch of Blood 
Vines, a plant that consists of a large buried bulb, 
several feet across, with many long spiky vines 
spreading out from it like a spider's web. The vines 
snake across the ground, hiding under the leaf li8er, 
and climb trees to hang from the lower branches. 
Should any animal wander into the area near the 
Blood Vine, the tendrils will activate and a8empt to 
grab hold of it. As they do so the spikes dig into the 
flesh and start to drain the unfortunate victim of its 
fluids whilst dragging them slowly towards the 
central bulb, where they will be pulled underground 
for leisurely digestion. Blood Vines are found in 
patches - twenty, thirty or more plants spread out 
across an area waiting to snare anything unfortunate 
enough to come close.
As the vines start to slither around you, test against 
Awareness. If you succeed you quickly spot the 
fastest route out of the patch and only spend one 
round fighting the Blood Vines. If you fail the test you 
blunder further into the patch and must spend 1d6 
rounds fighting your way out!
Blood Vines 
SKILL  
 
7 
STAMINA  
* 
Weapons:   
Blood Drain 
Armour:   
None. 
*A patch of Blood Vines is too large to be beaten with a few 
sword swings. The aim is to fend them off whilst escaping. 
Clearing them requires spades, picks, lantern oil and a lot 
of time and effort. The Blood Vines a3ack by wrapping 
themselves around the body and sucking out blood - if they 
hit they cause 1d3 points of damage, armour and Dodge 
skill have no effect.
Blood Vines are of interest to alchemists and 
herbalists; should you survive and return to 
civilization you can sell knowledge of this colony's 
location for 20gp.
W24 Landslide
Your only warning of impending disaster is a brief 
flurry of loose stones and dirt trickling past you 
down the slope. As you look around for the source of 
this activity, fearing an ambush, there is an awful 
cracking, grinding noise as the earth about you starts 
to move. You have been caught in a landslide! 
You must try to dive free anyway you can. Make a test 
against your Dodge, Acrobatics or Climb skill (pick 
one only) to see if you can move clear of the danger 
area in time. 
If you succeed you tumble out of the way just in time 
and sit, counting your blessings, as a large volume of 
rocks and dirt rumble by. If you fail the test you are 
caught up in the chaos and bashed around. Take 2d6 
points of damage (cannot be dodged or avoided with 
armour) as you are smashed about and half buried. 
Eventually the landslide comes to a stop and, if you 
have survived, you are able to dig yourself out and 
carry on.
If you have a mount with you, it must also suffer your 
fate - if you dash out of the way it follows your lead, 
but if you get hit by the rocks then your mount also 
suffers 2d6 points of damage.


--- PAGE 229 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
228
W25 Wildfire
As you move along in a daze of your own thoughts, 
you spot a glowing firefly bouncing in the air. 
Looking closer you realise that it is not an insect but 
a smouldering ember trailing wisps of smoke. Your 
senses alerted, you peer around and see thickening 
smoke drifting towards you - a wildfire is 
approaching! Your options are to flee, try to build a 
fire break or try to find shelter. If you wish to flee 
make a Running skill check (or Ride if you are 
mounted). If you have some means of making fire 
you can try to fight fire with fire, but it is risky - you 
must test your LUCK to succeed. If you wish to try to 
find shelter (a cave or pond for example) make a 
Region Lore skill test to quickly spot a place to avoid 
the flames.
If you fail with your escape plan, the fire catches you 
nd you take 2d6 points of STAMINA damage as the 
flames roar about you.
If this encounter happens at night you see it earlier 
and may take a detour around it, costing you half a 
day in travel time but not requiring any skill tests.
W26 Pit Trap
Many hunters use the wilderness as their larder and 
you have blundered into a pit trap left here to catch 
game. Make a test against your Trap Knowledge skill 
with a -2 penalty (the trap like most of its kind has 
been concealed) - if you succeed you have spo8ed the 
trap and can move around it with a sigh of relief. You 
may also choose to test your LUCK to avoid the trap. 
If you fail, you crash through the branches covering 
the trap and tumble into the pit. Roll 1d6 - on 1-3 you 
slam into the ground suffering 1d6 points of damage, 
on a 4-6 you fall onto spikes and suffer 1d6+3 points 
of damage. Either way, if you survive you can 
carefully dig your way out of the hole.
W27 Ghost
You spy a lonesome figure approaching you; as you 
stop to observe their approach a shudder passes 
through you. The figure makes no sound and is not 
walking, but drifting towards you with dead, staring 
eyes fixed firmly on yours - it is a ghost! You are 
rooted by fear and must wait and discover what it 
wants with you. Roll 1d6 - on a 1-2 the ghost is the 
crazed shade of someone that suffered a terrible 
death and with a wailing cry it lays a curse on you 
before it disappears.  Test against your LUCK or lose 
one point of SKILL and STAMINA for 1d6 days. On a 
3-5 the ghost silently pleads with you but you cannot 
understand what it wants; after a few minutes of this 
it fades away with a mournful sigh. On a 6 the ghost 
looks deep into your spirit and communicates a 
message - it wants you to help it find its grave! The 
old grave is now overgrown and it will take you a day 
to find it if you wish to help (roll for weather and 
encounters). The ghost follows you silently imploring 
you to continue the search and when you find the 
grave it sinks into it, holding out its hands in thanks. 
Restore one point of temporary LUCK.
W28 Campsite
As fortune would have it you come across an 
abandoned campsite, a place where people have 
recently stopped and rested. Roll 1d6 - on a 1-2 the 
site is occupied by four wolves (SKILL 5 STAMINA 6 
Weapon: Small Bite Armour: None) which are 
gnawing on some bones that were left behind - if you 
fight them, you must fight them all together - don’t 
forget to add the ganging up bonus if you are 
outnumbered. If two are killed the others will flee, 
leaving you with the campsite to yourself. On a roll of 
3-5 the site is empty but you do find some neatly 
stacked firewood and kindling you can use to make a 
fire (or in a hot location, some shelter and 1d6 
waterskins of water in the form of a tiny spring). On 
a 6 not only do you find firewood, but also a dagger, 
a backpack, a flint and tinder box, a cooking pot and 
a waterskin - the owner seems to have left in a hurry. 


--- PAGE 230 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
229
W29 Herd of Wild Boar
With a squeak and a squeal a group of Wild Boar 
burst from cover nearby, probably startled by your 
movements. 
Many of the beasts flee but three males turn and face 
you ready to charge. If you don’t want to fight them 
you can test your Animal Lore skill; if you succeed 
you use calm movements and gestures to mollify 
them and avoid combat. Otherwise, they snort and 
rush at you.
Wild Boar 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  
6 
 
Weapon:   
Small Bite 
Armour:   
Light. 
Once one of the boar is killed the others flee - you 
may make a Crafting skill roll to get 1d3 meals from 
the carcass and a couple of large tusks worth 2gp 
each.
W30 Insect Swarm
As you are moving along you disturb a swarm of 
biting insects, some kind of huge mosquito, that were 
resting in the vegetation around your feet. With an 
angry buzz they swirl around you biting and stinging 
before you can cover yourself and dash out of the 
cloud of flu8ering wings. 
The bites cause only one point of STAMINA damage 
but  leave angry, inflamed welts on your skin. Test 
against your Healing special skill or LUCK to avoid 
catching a disease. If you succeed, you shiver for half 
a day but nothing worse happens. If you fail, roll on 
Table 4.3.2 Diseases. 
W31 Prospectors
You hear talking and the clinking of people moving 
whilst carrying equipment. Fearing an ambush you 
duck behind some cover and peer around. 
Approaching you are four dwarves, prospectors by 
the looks of it, they carry pickaxes, shovels and 
equipment for surviving in the wilds. They haven’t 
noticed you yet, what do you do? 
● Sticking to your hiding place you let them go past. 
● Step out, calmly, and try to draw them into a 
conversation - make a test of Etique8e skill (dwarf 
heroes get a +3 bonus) to find out more about the 
area. If you fail the conversation drifts into silence 
and the dwarves leave, if you succeed you gain +2 to 
your next Region Lore roll in this area. 
● Easy prey! You leap out and a8ack! Dwarf 
Prospector SKILL 5 STAMINA 8 Weapon: Pickaxe 
(handaxe) Armour: Chain Hauberk. If you kill two of 
the dwarves the others will a8empt to flee. Each has 
4 torches, flint & tinder, 2 meals and a waterskin.
W32 Frozen Bodies
You stumble across a gruesome sight - a huddle of 
bodies, travellers who must have been caught in a 
storm and have frozen to death as they tried to shelter 
from the cold. You can ignore this terrible warning 
and simply move on or try to investigate, using 
whatever tools you have available to scrape away the 
ice and search their belongings. Roll 1d6 - 1: As you 
loot the corpses one lurches into life - a zombie! 
Zombie SKILL 6 STAMINA 6 Weapon: Frozen Fists 
(treat as club) Armour: Monster light. 2-4: Nothing of 
interest, 5-6: One of the corpses has a silver pendant 
worth 1d6+1gp. 
Whatever the outcome, if you have a shovel or 
pickaxe (or some other means of breaking the 
ground) you can spend half a day digging a shallow 
grave for these unfortunates; restore one point of 
LUCK as the gods look favourably on your act of 
compassion.


--- PAGE 231 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
230
W33 Bone Pile
A white glint catches your eye and as you move 
closer you realise there is a pile of sun bleached bones 
sca8ered on the ground. You can ignore it or 
investigate. If you investigate, roll 1d6: 
1 - As you approach the bones shake and form into a: 
Skeleton 
SKILL  
 
6 
STAMINA  5 
Weapon:   
Small Claw 
Armour: None, but it takes half damage from   
 
bladed weapons. 
2-3: You poke around for a while, but it is just a pile 
of old bones. 
4-5: Clearly this was once a traveller like yourself - 
you find a dagger, a leather cuirass and an empty 
waterskin. 6: Amongst the bones a flash of gold leads 
you to find a plain ring, worth 1d6+1gp.
W34 Leeches
Wading slowly through some dank muddy water 
that barred your way, you realise with horror that it 
is infested with fat leeches that are now wriggling 
towards you. You can make a Swim skill roll to dash 
to safety or lose 1d6 points of STAMINA as they drain 
your blood! If you are mounted, make a Ride skill roll 
to charge out of the water or your steed loses 1d6 
points of STAMINA. If you are damaged by the 
leeches, roll on Table 4.3.2 Diseases.
W35 Swamp Gas
A strange smell alerts you to the fact that you have 
unwi8ingly wandered into a cloud of flammable 
swamp gas, which could burst into flame at any 
moment. Make a Marsh & Swamp region lore skill to 
see if you can work out how to get out - if you 
succeed, you carefully work your way out of the 
danger zone and may carry on your journey. If you 
fail, you cause a spark and ignite the gas - the 
explosion causes you (and any mount) 2d6 damage, 
you may test your Dodge skill to reduce this by half.
W36 Dungeon Entrance
You have stumbled across the entrance to a dungeon! 
You’ve seen it before any of the monsters have 
spo8ed you, so you can ignore it if you want and 
carry on. On the other hand, if you are feeling 
adventurous you can stop your journey here and 
investigate. Create a dungeon as described in 
Chapter 5! The dungeon has 1d6+3 sections.  This 
dungeon does not form part of any missionsyou are 
engaged in. 
W37 Giant
Either the sight of an enormous figure looming in the 
distance or, if you are in a forest or jungle, the 
crashing of undergrowth and shaking of the ground 
warn you that a giant is fast approaching. These great 
humanoids come in a variety of types and 
temperaments, but all of them are powerful and 
potentially dangerous. Most will a8ack adventurers 
on sight either to eat them or take their treasure (or 
both) and a smart hero will try to avoid them. The 
type of giant you face depends on your environment, 
but your options are the same. 
● Hide: you look around for a place to conceal 
yourself, make a Sneaking test to see if you succeed. 
● Flee! You turn and run or ride away. Test your 
Running or Riding skill to see if you are fast enough. 
If you succeed, add half a day to your travel time as 
you backtrack, if you fail he catches up with you. 
● Talk your way out of it: A risky move, but you 
decide to try and talk your way out of it, either 
pleading with the giant or telling some lie to stop 
them eating you. Make a Con or Etique8e skill roll 
but with a -3 penalty to convince it, providing 
substantial food (8 meals) or treasure (10d6gp) gets 
rid of the skill roll penalty. If you fail you must fight. 
● Test your LUCK - you stand stock still and plead 
with the gods to save you. Test your LUCK - if 
successful the giant wanders off in another direction, 
never to be seen again. If you fail you may choose 
another option or fight.


--- PAGE 232 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
231
Plains & Forest:  
Forest Giant 
SKILL  
 
9  
A8 2
STAMINA   
9 
Weapon:   
Club (treat as Morning Star)
Armour:   
Medium. 
Hills & Mountain:  
Hill Giant 
SKILL  
 
9  
A8 2
STAMINA  
11 
Weapon:   
Club (treat as Morning Star),  
Armour:   
Medium. 
If you flee it will hurl a rock at you - hits on 1-3 on 1d6 
for 1d6 STAMINA damage.
Desert:   
 
Cave Giant 
SKILL  
 
9  
A8 2
STAMINA  
10 
Weapon:   
Club (treat as Morning Star),  
Armour:   
Light 
You cannot talk your way out of this fight, they are 
too dim.
Tundra & Ice:   
Frost Giant 
SKILL  
 
10  
A8 3
STAMINA  
10  
Weapon:   
Spear with +1 damage, 
Armour:   
Medium. 
They are skilled hunters and if you try to hide, you 
must take the Sneaking skill test with a -3 penalty.
Rivers & Lakes, Jungle & Marsh:  Marsh Giant 
SKILL  
 
9  
A8 2
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:   
Spear with +1 damage,  
Armour:   
Light. 
You cannot talk your way out of this fight.
Shorelines & Sea:  
Sea Giant 
SKILL  
 
10  
A8 3
STAMINA  
17 
Weapon:   
Spear with +3 damage, , 
Armour:   
Heavy.
W38 Mirage
Upon the shimmering horizon a tantalising prospect 
appears; a lush green oasis that will provide you with 
shelter and comfort. But is it real? Make a test of your 
Awareness or Desert lore skills (pick only one). If you 
succeed you know, with sinking heart, that this is 
merely a mirage and not worth your time. If you fail, 
you are convinced of its existence and hurry in that 
direction - by the time you realise your mistake, you 
have wasted half a day of travelling.
W39 Leper Colony
You see in the distance a small collection of huts 
gathered around a small stone temple, with smoke 
rising from the chimneys and even at a distance you 
can see people moving about. You decide to approach 
a bit closer, hoping to find somewhere to rest safely 
or trade some supplies. It seems to be a tiny hamlet 
but just as you are about to enter you hear something 
that chills you - the ringing of the lepers bell! A chill 
runs through your body and you pull your cloak 
across your nose and mouth, just as one of the 
residents comes from behind a hut and spots you. As 
well as the bell, they are wearing rags and bandages 
and evidence of their illness is clear upon their face 
and exposed skin. They hold out their hand and ask 
‘do you bring alms to us wretches, stranger?’ You 
may: 
● Reel away in fear and horror, you have no business 
here. You stumble and run until you feel you are at a 
safe distance. 
● Stand your ground and steady yourself. Provided 
you keep your distance, there is no danger. You 
signal the man to stay where they are, proceed to 
place some of your food on the ground (deduct a 
number of meals, at least four) before backing away. 
The leper thanks you profusely and offers to pray for 
you. In your next combat you have +2 bonus to your 
rolls (skill and damage). 


--- PAGE 233 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
232
● These wretches need your help, no ma8er the risk. 
You enter the colony and move among the lepers, 
offering what you can in healing and comfort. You 
find out who some of them are and promise to ask for 
help at the next se8lement you come to. You provide 
them with some food (deduct 2d6 meals) and after 
doing what you can, you leave. The prayers of the 
lepers go with you and grant +1 bonus to all your 
rolls for three days, but you must also test your 
LUCK. If you pass, you have avoided catching the 
disease. If you fail, you have contracted Leprosy. You 
will lose one point of SKILL each month until you die 
- this can only be healed by visiting a temple 
dedicated to one of the gods of good (Galana, Telak 
etc) and making a ‘donation’ of 10d6gp. Feature: The 
Leper Colony should be noted on your map, you can 
find or avoid it in the future with a successful Region 
Lore skill test. You may only help them once per 
month.
W40 Young Dragon
One of the most terrifying aspects of encountering a 
dragon in the wild is that unless you are looking in 
the direction from which it approaches, the first thing 
you might know about it is a scorching burst of flame 
that sets you and your companions alight! These 
creatures, even as juveniles, are powerful enough to 
quickly and easily overcome most heroes leaving 
behind either a charred pile of bones or a patch of 
blood spa8ered ground and the mystery of footprints 
that suddenly come to a stop.
Firstly you must test your LUCK - if you fail you are 
facing the wrong way and the Young Dragon will 
begin by swooping across and breathing on you. If 
you pass you spy its terrifying form in the distance 
and can either stand your ground (see the combat 
details below) or hide. If you wish to hide you can test 
your Sneaking or Region Lore to find a place that will 
be out of sight, or you can test your LUCK again - if 
you succeed the dragon hasn’t noticed you and flies 
on.  The type of dragon depends on the environment.
Forest, Hills & Mountain:   Young Black Dragon 
SKILL  
 
14  
A8 4
STAMINA  
20 
Weapon:   
Very Large Bite with +2, 
Armour:   
Heavy with +2 to the roll.
Breath - test your LUCK (or Dodge skill) or take 4 
points of damage, once every six rounds. 
Plains & Desert: Young Red Dragon 
SKILL  
 
11  
A8 3
STAMINA  
14 
Weapon:   
Very Large Bite with +2,  
Armour:   
Heavy with +2 to the roll. 
Breath - test your LUCK (or Dodge skill) or take 2 
points of STAMINA damage every round. 
Tundra & Ice: Young White Dragon 
SKILL  
 
12  
A8 3
STAMINA  
14 
Weapon:   
Very Large Bite with +2 
Armour:   
Heavy with +2 to the roll. 
Breath - Roll 1d6 each round. On a 1-2 it breathes 
icy cold causing 3 points of STAMINA damage, 
which can be avoided with a test of LUCK or the 
Dodge skill. 
Rivers, Jungle, Marsh, Sea: Young Green Dragon 
SKILL  
 
13  
A8 4
STAMINA  
18 
Weapon:   
Very Large Bite with +2 
Armour:   
Heavy with +2 to the roll. 
Breath - test your LUCK or Dodge skill or take 2  
points of STAMINA damage, once every three 
rounds.
Once fighting begins you must either defeat it in 
some way or test your LUCK; if you succeed on that 
test the Young Dragon knocks you unconscious and 
then decides for some reason not to devour you; you 
wake up a few hours later with a sore head. It will, 
even if you pass your LUCK test, devour any horses, 
mules etc you have with you.


--- PAGE 234 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
233
6.4 Unusual Locations & Themes
The rules presented thus far cover many standard 
locations and environments of the sort that you might 
find in most fantasy se8ings, but there are an endless 
number of places that can be added to customise your 
world and adventures. There simply isn’t enough 
space to cover them all properly though the 
mechanics and tables provided in this book can be 
used as templates to be modified as you see fit. You 
can change the encounters, add your own, alter 
things like the weather conditions, the number of 
encounters per day and the chances of ge8ing a 
hostile encounter compared to meeting someone that 
just wishes to talk.
If you are using a place in passing you can try to 
modify the tables as you go but if you are creating an 
environment you intend to use frequently (for 
example, the heart of your campaign takes place in a 
chaos infested land of hills and plains which your 
heroes will traverse many times) it can be a be8er 
idea to write up your modifications and altered 
encounter tables in full for your own reference.
Some 
examples 
of 
different 
locations 
and 
environments are given here, with ideas as to how 
you might want to modify the ruleset. The more 
effort you put into customising the map and 
encounter tables, the more unusual and memorable 
your environment will be!
Unusual Se=lements
This book covers the standard types of se8lement in 
which humans are the dominant race, but there are of 
course many other places where you might find large 
groups of people. Here are some suggestions and 
ideas on how you might modify the rules to be more 
fi8ing.
A Citadel or Fortress. A heavily guarded se8lement 
with a strong military presence. Remove locations 
that are unlikely to be present (theatre, slum alley, 
college) and increase the number of ‘militaristic’ 
locations such as Keep, Jail. For random encounters 
consider replacing social encounters Wedding Party 
or Mummers with encounters like Soldier or Surly 
Watchmen. Any trouble is likely to result in a roll on 
table 4.1.30 ‘Lawbreaker’ and there might be a curfew 
that prevents moving around at night.
Dwarven Se=lement. When creating your map, 
remember that the bulk of the se8lement is probably 
underground! You may want to create two maps, one 
for the ‘minehead’ part that is above ground, where 
dwarves and other races mix and do business, and 
another map for underground se8lement where the 
dwarves reside. As they are serious and orderly 
people, dangerous encounters will be far less likely 
underground and slums probably non-existent 
(though of course it could be a se8lement that has 
fallen on hard times, which is why the heroes are 
visiting in the first place). Most social encounters will 
be with dwarves, not humans. It might be that only 
dwarves are allowed in some parts of the se8lement 
(or at least permission must be obtained from the 
authorities to move around) and temples will be 
dedicated to the gods revered by the dwarves, such as 
Throff and Verlang.
Elven Se=lement. Elven se8lements are likely to be 
surrounded by and blended with the natural world, 
so your initial map should reflect that. They might be 
spread out in a great forest or clustered about a 
magnificent waterfall, but they should have some 
deep connection with nature. There might be an area 
set aside for non-elvish visitors and some locations 
(slum alleys, garbage heap) are not in line with elvish 
culture, as they would not tolerate the existence of 
poverty, filth or crime in their se8lements. Any act of 
criminality or violence (unless absolutely required) is 
likely to result in permanent expulsion. Temples 


--- PAGE 235 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
234
(most likely natural sites such as a great tree or 
tranquil pool) will be dedicated to gods revered by 
the elves such as Galana.
Ghost Town. A se8lement that has, for some reason, 
been taken over by the undead! The simplest way to 
do this is to work out encounters as normal but 
replace all the living with skeletons, zombies, ghouls 
and so on. Obviously, there should be some reason 
for the hero to come to such a terrible place. There 
could be enclaves of living people still clinging on in 
some parts of the se8lement giving your heroes a 
place to rest and trade, but the majority of the city 
would be overrun by the undead. Travelling around 
such a place should be extremely dangerous, 
particularly at night. Working out who is in charge of 
such a place and why it was created is an adventure 
in itself.
Goblin / Orc Se=lement. It might be unusual for the 
heroes to find themselves in a town or city dominated 
by orcs, goblins and other evil humanoids but not 
impossible. They could be in disguise, sneaking or 
magically altered to appear as one of these races, or 
they may need to risk going in to further their own 
quest. Whatever the reason, being in such a city 
should be incredibly dangerous and difficult, with 
violence being a near constant hazard and few places 
of refuge. Temples will be dedicated to the evil gods 
and encounters with the ‘Watch’ would mean a fight 
with a squad of orc militia - not pleasant!
Unusual areas of Wilderness
Any novel areas of wilderness should have some 
character or nature that makes them different enough 
to the usual places to require different encounters, 
terrain or weather. If you feel that a part of your 
wilderness needs to be given a different character to 
show that it is a special place, make sure to include 
some game effects that demonstrate it.
Volcano (replaces a mountain area). A volcano or 
area of volcanic activity, with lava and hot springs 
providing a constant hazard. Rare and valuable 
materials, such as obsidian, might be found here in 
abundance giving the hero a reason to visit, but the 
encounter tables (or weather) could include the 
chance of being caught in an eruption and monsters 
should be fire or heat related. Weather could include 
clouds of ash and terrain might involve sudden fast 
lava flows.
Suggested game effects: A roll of 6 on the weather table 
means ‘eruption’ in which heroes must test their 
Dodge skill (or LUCK) or be hit by falling rocks for 
2d6 points of damage. Replace one of the encounters 
with ‘lava flows’ which cut off your path and force 
you to spend another day going around, and replace 
another encounter with ‘toxic gas cloud’ which 
requires you to test your Awareness skill or suffer 2d6 
points of damage as you nearly choke to death on the 
deadly but invisible gas. No se8lements, tracks or 
paths can be found in this area as they are constantly 
destroyed by eruptions.
Polluted Zone (could replace any area). For some 
reason a large area of land has been polluted or burnt, 
with pools of slick oil and acid pits do8ing the terrain. 
Monsters should be those that could survive such an 
environment and hazards could include clouds of 
poisonous gas or acid rain. Weather might include 
clouds of smoke or poison gas and terrain encounters 
could include pools of acid.
Suggested game effects: A roll of 6 on the weather table 
means ‘acid rain’ which causes 1d6 points of damage 
unless you can (Region Lore skill test) find a place to 
shelter. Replace one of the encounters with ‘acid pits’ 
which require a Climb skill test to pass or suffer 1d6 
points of damage, and replace another encounter 
with ‘toxic gas cloud’ which requires you to test your 
Awareness skill or suffer 2d6 points of damage as you 
nearly choke to death on the deadly but invisible gas. 


--- PAGE 236 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
235
Dead Zone (could replace any area). A part of the 
wilderness has been struck by necromantic magic 
and withered. Weather would be altered to include 
clouds of choking dust, terrain would include ro8en 
and dying plants and encounters could be replaced 
with undead versions of whatever turns up.
Suggested game effects: A roll of 6 on the weather table 
means ‘rain of blood’ which causes no damage but 
reduces all social skill tests by -2 unless you can 
(Region Lore skill test) find a place to shelter, lasting 
until you can clean it off. Replace all the monsters 
encountered with undead versions - so if you meet 
wolves they are zombie wolves and so on. Skeleton 
versions suffer reduced damage from piercing 
weapons (spears, bows etc), zombies are slow (you 
can run away) but determined, ghoul versions of 
monsters can paralyse. Friendly encounters are far 
less likely and they should be rerolled or ignored. No 
hunting or foraging possible and any food you are 
carrying spoils after 2 days in this necrotic 
environment. Any se8lements in this area are filled 
with the dead.
Area of Wild Magic or Chaos (could replace any 
area). In some places the effects of magic have 
warped the world to a terrible extent and strange and 
dangerous forms have emerged. Weather could 
include almost any effect, the terrain could change 
suddenly from one type to another (desert to tundra 
to mountains in a few miles) and encounters should 
be altered to include chaos beasts.
Suggested game effects: A roll of 6 on the weather table 
means ‘a storm of magic’ which causes whatever 
effect you like! Pick one of the weather effects from 
any environment or create your own - a Region Lore 
skill test can be made to find a place to shelter from it. 
Monsters encountered can be replaced with ‘chaos’ 
versions by giving them mutations or additional 
abilities such as the ability to breathe fire or spit 
poison. Friendly encounters are far less likely and 
they should be rerolled or ignored. Hunting and 
foraging are possible but any food might be (1-2 on 
1d6) toxic and cause 2 points of STAMINA damage 
when 
eaten. 
Any 
se8lements 
are 
probably 
abandoned due to the strange situation, or populated 
with people that serve chaos and are likely to be 
hostile or violent.
Other Planes (could replace any area). Perhaps your 
heroes have wandered off the ‘mortal’ planes and 
onto the elemental planes or some part of hell! 
Encounters should be adjusted to reflect that, so on 
the Plane of Air you may only meet air elementals or 
flying creatures, weather would be strange and 
extreme (constant high winds) and features could be 
clouds or storms.
Suggested game effects: A roll of 6 on the weather table 
should mean an elemental storm which would be 
extremely violent if the heroes have no protection, 
causing 2d6 points of damage with no way to find 
shelter as the whole are convulses. Encountered 
monsters 
should 
reflect 
the 
nature 
of 
the 
environment. Friendly encounters are extremely 
unlikely and should be ignored or replaced with 
dangerous monsters, perhaps elemental versions of 
the usual kinds. Thus on the planes of fire 
encountering a wild beast such as a lion would be 
‘fire’ lion that could inflict an extra point of fire 
damage when it hits. Se8lements, paths and tracks 
are probably non-existent and hunting and foraging 
impossible due to the changed nature of the wildlife.
Underwater (replaces Shorelines & Sea). Staying on 
the mortal plane but going into the sea or a great lake, 
it’s always fun to take on an underwater adventure. 
Of course your heroes may need some form of 
magical or special assistance to breathe underwater 
and move around with freedom. You should 
definitely think carefully about modifiers to combat 
or magical effects (does a fire bolt work underwater 
or not? It’s up to you).


--- PAGE 237 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
236
Suggested game effects: Weather effects can be changed 
to ‘tides’ or ‘currents’ - a strong current might risk 
sweeping you away or make combat difficult. You 
might allow the existence of caves or islands where 
the heroes could shelter from these effects. 
Encountered monsters should, naturally, be creatures 
that can survive underwater and friendly encounters 
should be modified or ignored to reflect the 
environment (a merchant could be a friendly group 
of merfolk for example). Se8lements could exist and 
paths and tracks could be replaced with known 
currents and hunting and foraging should be 
possible, though meat might have to be eaten raw 
due to the lack of fire.
Lost World / Dino-Land. A lost world means a place 
that is lost in time and is populated by creatures from 
past ages such as cavemen or dinosaurs. It could be 
any type of environment though ‘lush jungle’ is a 
popular choice, sometimes overlooked by a smoking 
volcano. 
Suggested game effects: Encounters (friendly or not) 
should be replaced with ‘primitive’ creatures such as 
cavemen or dinosaurs, se8lements and people should 
be barbaric and savage, tracks and roads should be 
non-existent, hunting and foraging should be easier 
but might have a chance (1 in 6) of leading to an 
encounter with a hunting dinosaur such as a 
Tyrannosaurus Rex, and weather effects might 
include a chance that the volcano explodes showering 
the area with balls of lava!
Unusual Dungeons
A dungeon is traditionally an underground complex 
but really it can be any group of rooms or spaces that 
are connected together, so let your imagination run 
wild. The method of creating dungeons described in 
Chapter 5 includes tables for dungeon origin, 
condition and creature conditions. You can modify 
these and the encounter tables to include different 
factors to give the dungeon some extra challenges. 
Examples of unusual ‘dungeons’ could include 
almost any type of structure that has a consistent set 
of rules.
Airship. An airship, flying through the sky and being 
a8acked by harpies. The ship could have several 
decks (levels) with rooms full of crew and monsters 
fighting each other, whilst it rocks dangerously from 
side to side. The map would be a series of decks and 
encounter tables should only include flying monsters 
and acrobatics skill checks might be needed to stay on 
your feet. Most importantly, don’t fall off!
Suggested game effects: Each round roll 1d6 - on a roll 
of 1 the airship has lurched unexpectedly and you 
must test your Acrobatics skill or fall to the ground. If 
this happens near the edge of a deck you must test 
your LUCK or fall off! Encounters can be modified to 
only include monsters that could fly, though there 
could also be some non-flying crew. Se8ing fire to the 
airship should be possible though this is obviously a 
very dangerous thing to do.
Other Planes. A dungeon structure (caves, lair and so 
on) but located on a different plane of existence. A 
visit to an elemental plane - a hero could be moving 
across islands of hot rock surrounded by lava. All the 
encounters 
would 
be 
heat 
loving 
creatures, 
environmental hazards and traps would be centred 
around fire damage and the hero would need to find 
a way back to their own plane of existence. The map 
could be a series of rocky islands in the lava.
Suggested game effects: Much like the other planes 
wilderness area the ‘dungeon condition’ and the 
encountered monsters should reflect the nature of the 
plane of existence, as should the layout, shape and 
contents of rooms. A dungeon set on the plane of air 
is unlikely to have heavy stone doors between the 
rooms!   


--- PAGE 238 ---

Chapter 6 - Wildernesses
237
High Magic. A wizard has shrunk the hero down to 
miniature size and set her to climb up inside an oak 
tree, with escape only possible by reaching the top. 
The map might be a spiral of rooms and the 
encounters should be with miniaturised creatures or 
normal sized (and therefore giant to the hero) insects 
and bugs.
Suggested game effects: How you modify the dungeon 
and creature conditions and the encounters and room 
contents will depend entirely on what sort of ‘high 
magic’ adventure you are playing. For example, the 
heroes could be transformed by an evil wizard into 
characters within a painting and have to ba8le their 
way out by moving from one picture to another in a 
gallery with each painting representing one room. 
This is a lot of fun to play around with, but be warned 
that it requires careful thought and planning by the 
Director in order to work.
Haunted House. Imagine a huge old mansion or 
castle that once entered, seals itself up trapping the 
heroes inside until they discover the way to escape. 
The layout and features of such a building would be 
very similar to those of a normal house or castle but it 
would be haunted by restless spirits or terrifying 
ghosts - the aim is to survive the experience and 
escape before the haunted house claims you.
Suggested game effects: Dungeon conditions should 
include a chance to encounter a wandering ghost or 
spirit in any room (test vs SKILL or flee for 1d6 
rounds), doors should open or close without 
warning, encounters should be with ‘spooky’ 
monsters - not always undead, but perhaps giant bats 
and spiders, werewolves, demons or other planar 
entities that might be a8racted to a haunted house. 
Each floor of the house would be a different dungeon 
section and the goal should be to find the means to 
escape (or destroy the curse that made the house 
haunted in the first place).
Dungeon Themes
As well as dreaming up some unusual structures we 
can also come up with themes for our dungeons. 
Instead of coming across random monsters and 
features we choose the ones that are most suitable 
and make use of the bestiaries and monster lists we 
have available to find groups of similar monsters. 
This requires a fair amount of additional effort as 
each room presents a new set of choices, but the 
reward is a dungeon which feels like a distinct place 
with its own character. Some examples of dungeon 
themes and the associated choices are as follows.
Undead. Although they can be found anywhere 
crypts, dungeons and buried buildings or ruins - 
places where they can pass the endless centuries in 
peace - are common haunts of the undead. Dungeon 
conditions such as crumbling, unholy or chilled 
might be found, creature conditions such as plagued 
or armoured work well. Encounters should be with 
undead of different types and if they have been set 
here to guard something, the number of traps and 
secret doors should be increased to deter looters.
Demons. Although they could be found anywhere, 
demons may be a8racted to chaos wrought or magic 
wrought structures, indeed they may have been 
summoned to such places. Dungeon conditions such 
as unholy, infernal or magically fecund could be used 
and toxic or noisy creature conditions work well for 
demons. Encounters should be with different kinds of 
demons or creatures that would be willing to serve 
them and rooms should be unfurnished or filled with 
the remains of equipment that the demons have 
destroyed. Intelligent demons might set traps of a 
magical nature though in general they prefer to rely 
on their own abilities to deal with problems.


--- PAGE 239 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
238
Orcs & Goblins. An ever popular choice these 
vicious humanoids can make use of any structure but 
prefer caves, ruins, dungeons and their own chaos 
wrought citadels. As humanoids they may keep some 
areas well lit, but are prone to let things fall into 
decay so crumbling and slimy are also possible. There 
are a huge number of orcs, goblins and associated 
creatures to choose for encounters and they could be 
starving, well fed, armoured, under-equipped, lazy 
or wary depending on how ba8le ready you want 
them to be. Room conditions and features should 
reflect the vicious nature of these evil creatures. Traps 
and locked or barred doors should be common, 
though workshops, stores and hiding places (Side 
chambers) should also be found.
Wild Creatures. By wild creatures we do not mean 
badgers and squirrels but the dangerous, monstrous 
varieties such as Sand Worms, Giant Ants or 
Centipedes and the like. Lairs, caves and biological 
structures are most appropriate and dungeon 
conditions such as slimy, misty or overgrown work 
well with this theme. Creature conditions could be 
infested, toxic or wary (natural creatures may not 
wish to fight) and monster encounters could be all of 
one class of animal - all insects, for example. Room 
conditions should reflect the needs of the animals and 
features such as traps, doors (secret or otherwise), 
stores or workshops will be absent.
‘Deathtrap’ Dungeons. An option for those that want 
to test their heroes a ‘deathtrap’ dungeon doesn’t 
need to be a dungeon but will almost certainly be a 
carefully built place such as a dungeon, sewer, crypt, 
buried buildings or ruins, magic wrought or chaos 
wrought structure. The dungeon conditions misty or 
infernal could be used but almost any (apart from 
consecrated) are possible as are all the creature 
conditions, which may vary from section to section 
(the nature of this type of dungeon is its variability). 
Monster encounters can be themed but using the 
random tables works just as well for such a place. The 
key feature is that the use of traps, secret doors and 
other room features should be increased beyond the 
normal. Try to be as inventive as possible when 
combining these with other rooms conditions such as 
flooded, unstable and entrance features such as 
alarmed or portcullis. The likely reward for a 
deathtrap dungeon is either a great prize or simply 
the chance to escape.
Some other themes you may want to explore are evil 
humanoids (corrupted humans or dwarves), Lizard 
Men and their associated servants, Dark Elves and 
their slaves / thralls, giants and giant kin, creatures of 
chaos, elementals and evil cultists. Since creating a 
themed dungeon requires significantly more effort 
than simply using the random generation approach 
the key thing is that it is worth your time and effort, 
either because it is needed for your campaign or 
adventure or because you enjoy the challenge of 
creating something unique and characterful.
Summary
The rules provided in chapters 4, 5 and 6 help you 
create a wide variety of places but obviously cannot 
cover every possible scenario, but the basic 
mechanics - describe the place, the challenges it 
presents and the interesting or dangerous encounters 
- are applicable wherever your heroes go. It can take 
time and effort to create somewhere unusual but this 
is rewarded by the opportunity to take on unique and 
memorable adventures. Let your imagination run 
wild!


--- PAGE 240 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
239
7 - POLITICAL, RELIGIOUS AND SOCIAL FACTORS
In this chapter we explore political, religious and 
social factors and lay out ways of establishing what 
they are for any particular se8lement or region. We 
also provide some ideas and rules relating to the 
motivations and upbringing of your heroes. Those of 
you who are focused on the exploration and combat 
aspects of the game might see these as background 
issues but they do add depth and direction to both 
your heroes and villains.
7.1 Political Systems & Religion
Many people when creating a campaign or adventure 
will already have chosen a dominant political and 
religious system for their se8ing, as this can have a 
significant impact on motivations and consequences. 
In order to help those that are undecided, this system 
will generate broad political and religious systems 
that are dominant in your se8lement or wilderness 
(they are generally not applicable to a dungeon!).
You can make the rolls for a kingdom or region as a 
whole, or have separate rolls for each se8lement you 
encounter. Either way, remember to make a note of it 
and think about how it might impact your game. 
These tables will give you some ideas to help flesh 
out the nature of your city, town or village. As with 
the maps, if you feel something is inappropriate or 
wrong for your campaign, then you should feel free 
to change it as you see fit.
Using these tables can result in some very 
contradictory results. For example, a se8lement 
where the people are good, with strong controls, but 
still worship the gods of evil? It’s up to you to 
interpret this - perhaps the se8lement was recently 
conquered by a good lord, but he hasn’t yet had time 
to clear the city of the evil temples and people still 
worship there. This sort of contradiction can be 
challenging to resolve but ultimately makes your 
world more interesting.  To generate a broad view of 
the political situation, we determine the morality and 
level of control.
Morality
Morality is a description of the general a8itudes of 
the people towards their own behaviour and how 
they treat strangers, sometimes called alignment. No 
morality is universal. The kindest societies will still 
have their share of sociopaths and the most evil 
societies will still harbour those who secretly treat 
others with kindness.
Good: People believe in fairness, decency and 
compassion. The strong have a duty to help the 
weak and the community takes responsibility for 
its actions as a whole. Charity and helpfulness are 
common and strangers are treated with kindness.
Neutral: People believe that their decisions are a 
private concern and a ma8er for individual 
reflection. The community response to a situation 
is a ma8er of discussion and negotiation with the 
outcome depending on circumstances. Strangers 
are dealt with according to their behaviour.
Evil: People believe that their self interest trumps 
any wider concern and that the needs of the 
individual are paramount. Cruelty and violence 
are acceptable and ‘might makes right’ is the 
assumed basis for social behaviour. The strong 
should take advantage of the weak and strangers 
are exploited if possible.


--- PAGE 241 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
240
Level of Control
Control is a description of how ordered a society is 
and how closely its individual members are 
encouraged or forced to adhere to the norms. A 
strongly controlled society will behave in a uniform 
way; most people will behave according to the rules. 
A weakly controlled society will be argumentative 
and disjointed. 
Control can be achieved by a number of methods, 
particularly in a fantasy se8ing where magic is 
possible, but in general you can assume that a strong 
level of control means there are regular patrols by 
militias and watchmen and that there is an organised 
law enforcement structure, whereas in a society with 
weak control it might be rare to come across someone 
who has official responsibility for keeping the peace.
Weak: Li8le enforcement of the rules of behaviour 
and li8le punishment for those that deviate from 
these. Law enforcement is sporadic and listless; 
the enforcers are treated with contempt and seen 
as low status, often open to bribery or deception. 
Effect: if using the Lawbreaker rules add a +2 
bonus to the result of the roll and the minimum 
result on Table 4.1.30 Lawbreaker  is a 4, treat any 
roll lower than that as a 4.
Moderate: The law is enforced and aberrant 
behaviour is dealt with when it disrupts the peace 
or goes against the normal conduct. Law 
enforcement is considered to be a profession and 
the extent to which it is respected depends on the 
quality of the individuals that perform it. A bad 
constable will be ignored and a competent one will 
be treated with respect but not fear. The extent of 
the law is negotiable, often on the basis of the size 
of the bribe that can be offered.
Strong: The law is rigorously enforced by a well 
organised group of professional soldiers or militia 
that ensure any deviation from normal behaviour 
is punished according to the laws set down by the 
king, lord or tyrant that rules this place. 
Effect: If you are using the Lawbreaker rules, 
deduct a -2 penalty to the result of the roll and the 
maximum result on Table 4.1.30 Lawbreaker is a 
10, treat any rolls of 11 or 12 as having rolled 10. 
Patrols are frequent and well armed.
If required you can cross reference the local 
conditions with the results for the kingdom, empire 
or jurisdiction in which the se8lement or location is 
situated. 
Table 7.1.1 Political System. Roll once to establish morality and again to determine level of control
1d6 
 
 
 
 
 
Control
Morality 
1: Weak  
 
 
2-5: Moderate  
 
 
6: Strong
1-2: Good 
People do their best but  
People are pleasant but the will 
Laws are just and widely 
cannot guarantee safety;  
or resources to enforce that do 
enforced, they have the
help must be sought from  
not always exist. 
 
 
support of the general
individuals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
population.
3-5: Neutral 
People do as they will and  
Order is maintained with a light 
An extensive system of laws 
circumstances dictate   
touch, mostly for the sake of  
is maintained that balance
outcomes. 
 
 
trade and comfort. 
 
 
freedom and safety.
6: Evil  
Might makes right, the  
The population is hostile and many Brutal control from the top 
strongest use force and fear  crimes are overlooked, particularly down ensures that the 
to dominate without any  
those commi8ed by the wealthy. 
weakest in society are
curbs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mercilessly exploited.


--- PAGE 242 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
241
Religion
A major component of morality in a society is the 
nature of the dominant religion. A city in which 
Libra, Goddess of Justice & Truth, is worshipped 
fervently is more likely to be ‘good’ with strong laws 
than a city in which Tanit, goddess of Envy and 
Jealousy, is held in highest regard. Of course, it can be 
very interesting to turn this on its head and try and 
work out why a ‘good’ se8lement is worshipping an 
evil god. On Titan the gods are divided into three 
categories, as described in the core rulebook. The 
gods of good, the neutral gods (including the beast 
lords) and the gods of evil. 
When you reach a new se8lement or region you 
should roll to see what the dominant religious view 
is.  If you are building your Se8lement starting with 
your map, you may have already decided which gods 
are worshipped here and why. In that case, use your 
judgement to determine what the religious climate of 
your se8lement is; remember that there may still be 
hidden shrines and temples to other gods.
Temples and shrines may have more than one god as 
a patron, particularly in small se8lements where they 
might only be able to afford the upkeep on a single 
site or building though obviously a general theme 
(good, neutral, evil) will dominate. So, for example, a 
small se8lement might have a temple dedicated to 
Galana (Plants & Fertility) that also has shrines or 
smaller chapels dedicated to other gods such as 
Telak, Glantanka or Sindla.
Try to consider the nature and location of your 
se8lement 
when 
deciding 
which 
gods 
are 
worshipped there. A city by a river might have a 
temple to Aqualis (Rivers) or Hydana (the Waters), a 
city which contains a college of magic might make 
space for a temple dedicated to Hamaskis (Learning).
 It should also be remembered that in a large 
se8lement, such as a city, there is plenty of room for 
people to construct private chapels or hidden temples 
- their location and function is of course a source of 
adventure!
Table 7.1.2 Religious Inclination of the Se=lement or Region
Morality (2d6)
Good  Neutr. Evil 
Religious Temperament  
 
 
Effect
2 
2-3 
2-7 
Evil: The Gods of Evil are worshipped here  At a temple you have a -2 penalty to all
and fear and distrust are etched onto the  
Social skill rolls and you cannot ask to be
faces of the populace. Might is right and   
healed unless you worship the gods of evil.
you must rely on yourself for protection.
3-5 
4-8 
8-10 
Neutral: The dominant religions are the  
None.
neutral gods and the se8lement tries to  
avoid conflict on either side of the  
 
argument.  
 
 
 
6-11 
9-10 
11 
Good: This se8lement tries to follow the  
If you visit a temple, you may make a
path of justice and fairness. Efforts are  
donation of 10gp to have 3 points of
made to uphold the law and punish   
STAMINA damage restored, once per day. 
criminals. People here are moralistic  
and judgemental of wrongdoing. 
 
None.
12 
11-12 12 
Universal: Somehow, all the Gods are 
allowed here and a state of tolerance 
has been achieved. It is a strange state of 
affairs; philosophy is a common hobby here.


--- PAGE 243 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
242
Specific God
Many religious sites will be used by more than one 
group. If you need to find out which god specifically 
is the main deity for the shrine or temple, you can use 
the following table to do so.
A temple dedicated to a specific god will have priests 
and acolytes that have been initiated into the 
mysteries of that deity and therefore have access to 
some or all of the priestly powers detailed for that 
god. You can also expect that the temple will be 
decorated and themed appropriately. What exactly 
that means is up to you, but you are encouraged to 
exercise your imagination. A temple dedicated to 
Solinthar (Mariners) might be in the shape of a ship, 
or might actually be a ship floating out in a harbour. 
A temple dedicated to Arthallogen (spiders) could be 
in the shape of an enormous web, with the altar at its 
centre and surrounded by real webs containing 
spiders of all sizes.
Unless the temple is hidden or secret, you should 
pursue the idea that they will be highly decorated 
and extravagant in design, as the worshippers will be 
keen to demonstrate their devotion to the deity.
Table 7.1.3 List of the Gods (roll 1d6 and then 1d6 to see which specific god)
Good 
 
 
 
 
Neutral 
1d6 
1d6  
God 
 
 
 
1d6 
1d6  
God 
 
 
 
Evil 
1-2 
1 
Sindla (Luck & Fate)  
1-5 
1 
Sukh (Storms)  
 
Slangg (Malice)
 
2 
Libra (Justice & Truth) 
 
2 
Hydana (the Waters)  
Tanit (Envy/Jealousy)
 
3 
Asrel (Beauty & Love) 
 
3 
The Beast Lords (varies) 
Disease
 
4 
Usrel (Peace)  
 
 
4 
Farigiss (Ice & Cold)  
Decay
 
5 
Courga (Grace) 
 
 
5 
Pangara (Winds) 
 
Arhallogen (Spiders)
 
6 
Fourga (Pride) 
 
 
6 
Aqualis (Rivers) 
 
Hmurresh (Flies)
3-4 
1 
Telak (Courage & Combat) 
6 
- 
Logaan (Tricksters) 
 
Death
 
2 
Hamaskis (Learning)  
 
 
3 
Galana (Plants & Fertility)
 
4 
Throff (Earth)  
 
 
5 
Filash (Fire)
 
6 
Glantanka (Sun)
5-6 
1 
Verlang (Metal Workers) 
 
2 
Lorodil (Volcanoes)
 
3 
Solinthar (Mariners)  
 
4 
Fulkra (Travellers)
 
5 
Atlan (Messenger) 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Tir (Lightning)


--- PAGE 244 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
243
Who is in Charge?
Ultimately there must be a person or group that holds 
power in your realm. We have not included any rules 
to decide who that is simply because it makes very 
li8le difference to how the game works (living under 
a good aligned king with strong control is basically 
the same as living under a good aligned council of 
merchants that also have strong control) but if your 
heroes are spending some time within a single realm, 
you might want to decide who is ruling it, so we will 
provide a list of examples for you to choose from.
• A king or queen, they derive power from 
tradition and support of the other nobles.
• A champion or folk hero, they derive power by 
support from the masses.
• A general or military leader, they derive power 
from control of the armies and navies.
• A high priest or group of priests, they control the 
church and are supported by believers.
• A scholar or sage they are leader by acclaim for 
their knowledge and abilities
• A secret group - this realm appears to be run in 
some normal way, but is in fact controlled from 
behind the scenes by a secret group.
• A council of merchants who control the realm by 
virtue of their wealth.
• A wizard or sorcerer who uses magic to control 
the populace.
These are not the only options. Perhaps your realm is 
ruled by a champion picked from the common folk 
by finding a fabled weapon? It might be hard to 
explain why that gives them a mandate, but this is a 
fantasy world and strange things can happen. You 
can make this decision at the start of your campaign 
or leave it until later, when you have worked out 
where your heroes will be spending their time.
7.2 Social Status and Rank
Everybody wants to get on in life, don’t they? As well 
as the trappings of success such as houses, art, 
jewellery and so on there are acknowledged ranks 
that can be obtained to denote the social status of an 
individual.
Positions of status vary enormously from society to 
society and many of them overlap with other ranks 
and titles to some extent. A very simple tribal society 
might divide everyone into child, adult, elder, 
shaman whereas a huge empire could have hundreds 
of official and unofficial positions to occupy. Many 
armies have chaplains, trade princes are given a place 
in the nobility and so on. There is no absolute reason 
why a hero cannot rise in more than one category. 
Because of the complexity this section is intended to 
provide a rough guide which players and the 
Director can apply to their adventures as they see fit 
- a way of ge8ing the conversation started, not 
finishing it. These rules are expected to be guidance 
rather than ‘hard’ rules like those covering combat.
The advantage of having a system covering social 
status is that it provides a long term goal for the hero 
to achieve. Instead of being merely an adventurer 
seeking coin, they can plan on becoming a grand 
duke, bishop or folk hero. As usual it is best to discuss 
these plans with the Director.
This guide is intended to be used in addition to and 
in conjunction with other guidance given in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebooks, such as the 
Heroes Companion (Chapters 3 and 4 particularly) 
and the core rulebook sections covering prices and 
trade.


--- PAGE 245 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
244
Social Rank
There are variations between ancient societies but 
there are three things that most of them have in 
common. Firstly, most people are employed in 
industry (manual labour, farming, mining etc) with a 
small ‘middle class’ and very small upper class.  Put 
simply, most people are peasants and moving up the 
ladder is hard. Secondly, most wealth is based on 
ownership of land or rights - merchants and 
professionals can gain wealth but very few compete 
with the incomes of the land owners. Thirdly, wealth 
is very unevenly distributed. Those at the top - the 5-
10% - control most of the resources and those at the 
bo8om have just enough to survive. This is a good 
motivation to become an adventurer - it's one of the 
few ways to change your wealth quickly!
In the Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook a simple 
table is given of social rank, going from 1 to 10, but 
with li8le explanation of how those values have been 
worked out and how a hero can go from one rank to 
the other. That does not mean it is unusable, but for 
the sake of this guide we have taken the basic concept 
and expanded it into something more rounded and 
complete. Heroes that do not wish to engage with the 
idea of Social Rank can use the simpler system in the 
main rulebook, but those who desire to explore the 
concept further can make use of this new set of rules.
In keeping with the usual AFF system we will 
provide a ranking from 2-12 though the precise 
ordering will depend on the se8ing you are using for 
your adventures. For example, in most se8ings the 
king is superior to a high priest but in a highly 
religious society that order could be reversed.
Status talent: A hero that takes the talent ‘Status’ 
upon creation has a Social Rank of 8. This means that 
they have, for some reason, acquired either a 
significant position in society or been born into a 
large amount of wealth - you should decide exactly 
why this has happened when you create that hero.
Table 7.2.1 Social Ranks
Social  Representative Positions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gold per annum
Rank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gross / Net*
2 
Beggar, Criminal, Slave, Torturer, Outlaw, Leper, Hag, Barbarian  
 
 
25 / 0
3 
Adventurer, Peasant, Soldier, Initiate, Pedlar, Watchman 
 
 
 
 
200 / 20
4 
Farmer, Minister, Student, Local Hero, Officer, Crafter, Squire, Sergeant 
 
 
300 / 50
5 
Captain, Clerk, Pride of the County, Researcher, Member, Trader, Witch  
 
500 / 100
6 
Artisan, Priest, Knight, Town Mayor, Champion, Lecturer, Master Craftsman 
 
700 / 200
7 
Baron, Colonel, Hero, Reader, Owner, Witchsniffer  
 
 
 
 
1,000 / 300
8 
Viscount,  Bishop, Professor, Surgeon, Merchant  
 
 
 
 
 
2,000 / 500
9 
Earl, Count, Archbishop, General, Hero of Legend, Enforcer 
 
 
 
3,000 / 1,000
10 
Marquess, Cardinal, Genius  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5,000 / 2,000
11 
Prince or Duke, High Priest, Field Marshall, Hero of Myth, Master, Merchant Prince 
10,000 / 5,000
12 
Monarch, King, Emperor, Grand Master 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50,000 / 20,000
*Gold per annum, Gross / Net is a rough guide to how much gold a person of that rank might receive in a year and how 
much they could have once the costs of their lifestyle have been dealt with, assuming they manage it well. So a Knight 
receives 700gp from his land, but only has 200gp a year to spend on ‘extras’. The descriptions of social roles provide more 
guidance and the campaign se3ing is also important. A knight in a kingdom ravaged by war, for example, might end up in 
debt at the end of the year due to the costs of buying horses, maintaining arms and armour and so on. Not all professions 
provide an income and there is no guarantee that reaching a certain rank will also mean gaining the wealth of their peers.


--- PAGE 246 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
245
Holdings are described in detail in the Advanced 
Fighting Fantasy Heroes Companion. As a rough 
guide, a holding produces one twentieth and one 
tenth of its purchase value per annum as income. 
Thus to purchase the holdings needed for Social Rank 
6 (700gp per annum income) would cost 7,000gp to 
14,000gp, though of course such holdings are often 
gifted rather than bought. So an artisan might come 
into the possession of a set of workshops from a 
family member or patron and so on. It’s up to you to 
decide if your heroes are given their income or have 
to purchase it. Requiring heroes to purchase their 
holdings, at least in part, is a great motivation for 
them to go on adventures!
Uses of Social Rank
Test your Rank: If you are trying to decide if a 
hero or NPC can do something social, their rank 
can be used to take a test. So if a town mayor (rank 
7) tries to raise a militia, you can roll 2d6 against 
that rank to see if it works - if they get a seven or 
less they have succeeded. Bonuses or penalties 
based on circumstances can apply (so if the mayor 
was trying to raise a militia as a horde of goblins 
approached, they would get a bonus. If they were 
trying to do it to carry out a personal vende8a 
against their wife’s lover there would be a 
penalty).
Modify Social Skills: If two people of different 
rank meet, the difference can be used to provide a 
bonus or penalty to their social skill tests. So if a 
captain (rank 5) is talking to a peasant (rank 3) the 
captain would have a base +2 bonus to tests of 
etique8e, con, bargain and so on and the lower 
rank peasant would have a -2 penalty to the same 
skill tests. As usual, circumstances might justify 
other bonuses or penalties and the more stratified 
a society is could double or treble the effect to 
reflect the fact that ‘everyone knows their place’ 
(so a gap of one rank in social status causes +2 or 
-2 adjustment to the skill test).
Determine Privileges: If you are trying to decide 
who would have certain rights or access you can 
use social rank as a cut-off. For example, a city has 
a park which is maintained by the duke; only 
those of social rank 4 or higher are allowed in (no 
hoi polloi!). Within the park is a pleasure garden 
for those deemed worthy; only those of rank 6 or 
higher are invited inside. If a hero (rank 3) needs 
to get into the pleasure gardens, they will either 
have to sneak inside or find someone to go on their 
behalf.
Test for promotion or demotion: If you are trying 
to decide if a hero has done enough to move up a 
grade in their chosen career, you can roll 2d6. They 
need to roll at least equal to or higher than the 
current grade to progress. So a hero that is a priest 
(rank 6) has done some great deeds on behalf of 
the church and might be in line for promotion.
They roll 2d6, scoring a 5 - it looks like they are 
stuck as a priest for the time being! If they had 
rolled 2d6 and got a total of 6 or more they would 
increase their social rank by 1. They would now be 
a priest (Social Rank 7) and would need to get 
promoted again to reach the rank of bishop (Social 
Rank 8).
Bonuses and penalties can be applied based on 
what the hero has done and the likelihood of their 
being a position available. For example, a hero that 
has fought bravely in a great ba8le in which 
several of his superiors were killed should have a 
significant bonus to their promotion roll. 
A similar test can be used for demotion. If a hero 
has made some terrible mistakes or failures, they 
should roll 2d6 and compare it to their current 
rank. If the roll is equal or higher, they are 
demoted.


--- PAGE 247 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
246
To continue the example above - our priest is tricked 
into allowing the head of a demonic cult to escape 
from prison. Oh dear. The church is not pleased and 
the Director decides the hero must check for 
demotion. They roll 2d6, scoring 5 - less than their 
current Social Rank of 7. The bishop shouts at them 
but doesn’t punish them further. If they had rolled a 
7 or more, the church would have decided to publicly 
blame them for the mistake and their Social Rank 
would have dropped from 7 to 6 - still a priest, but a 
humbler one. 
What this means is that promotion gets harder the 
higher up you go, but so does demotion - the more 
powerful someone is in society, the more they can get 
away with!
In 
game 
effects: 
These 
are 
bonuses 
and 
advantages that come with your station in life. 
They are suggestions based on the broad 
categories and should be modified according to 
the specific nature of your ‘calling’. For example, 
an elven ranger is following a military career but 
their benefits might be more related to riding, 
access to horses, knowledge of secret trails and so 
on. 
Customisation 
is 
recommended. 
Some 
c a t e g o r i e s 
provide 
an 
income 
- 
this 
should be justified 
by 
having 
the 
hero acquire lands 
or 
businesses, 
either 
by 
purchasing them 
or receiving them 
as 
gifts. 
The 
important point is 
that the money 
does not simply 
appear out of thin 
air.
Descriptions of Social Status
Any large society will be extremely complex but 
advancement in social status can be divided into 
broad categories (with the obvious proviso that every 
society and campaign will have their own specific 
rules). The seven examples we will be using are 
popular acclaim (folk heroes, politicians), religious 
organisation, academia, the military, the nobility, 
mercantile and other organisations (such as secret 
societies or private clubs). Obviously, an individual 
can rise in more than one area - a beloved priest may 
also be a folk hero and a wise sage could be a 
respected academic and also be ennobled for their 
work. This does not mean a hero should keep track of 
multiple Social Rank scores, unless they wish to. A 
single score is sufficient for most circumstances and 
heroes should choose one area to represent their 
exploits, or create their own unique set of 
advancements if none of the categories are suitable.
Monitoring social status is something that can be as 
complex as you like; the ideas in this section can be 
used as wri8en or modified to include more detailed 
ideas such as conflict between factions in a society. If, 
for example, the nobility and the priesthood hate 
each other then their social ranks do not apply to 
those interactions.
Social ranks tend to bring duties, rewards, titles, 
incomes & expenses and expectations that should be 
modified so that they fit with your campaign. These 
ranks and titles are examples to be used as an 
inspiration.
Popular Acclaim
A person who performs conspicuous acts can rise to 
become a folk hero, celebrity or politician. It could be 
a hero that protects a village, a bard that is known for 
their extraordinary tales, a gladiator that has caught 
the eye of the crowd. This path is pursued by many 
adventurers as it relies on the actions of the 


--- PAGE 248 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
247
individual (or small group) instead of requiring 
money or patronage. Words and deeds, not 
connections. Those that rise in status by popular 
acclaim can acquire great power but have the risk that 
an unpopular act or decision can see them fall as fast 
as they rose! Someone who wishes to pursue this 
should choose a group they represent - their ‘people’. 
It could be ‘the mountain folk’, ‘poor farmers’ or ‘the 
commoners of the city’, any group that lacks power in 
your society.
Typical Motivations for pursuing popular acclaim 
are: Seeking fame, vanity, defending friends & 
family, love of your home, fighting against injustice, 
fighting for a downtrodden or powerless group.
Local Hero (rank 4). The village champion, the Big 
Fella, the Wise Woman - a person who, through 
their deeds, has distinguished themselves and 
earned the thanks of a small group. Not known 
outside this area, the local hero gets li8le 
compensation - maybe a discount here and there, 
a free meal or pint of beer occasionally and in 
return when trouble comes they are expected to 
step forward and deal with it. In game effect: +2 
Bargain skill tests in this community.
Pride of the County (rank 5). A figure that is known 
to fight for their community across a number of 
towns and villages, someone who has shown they 
are brave and capable on more than one occasion. 
The rewards come in the form of discounts and 
favours, maybe some small pieces of equipment 
and in return the pride of the county is expected to 
rush to help when the poor folk call on them. In 
game effect: +2 Leadership skill tests in this 
community.
Champion (rank 6). The people’s champion is 
widely known for their bravery and determination 
to face any threats to the common folk. It might be 
hunting down a dangerous ogre that was on the 
loose or standing up to a bad lord and making 
them change the law. In return the champion is 
likely to be provided with not just gifts and 
assistance but gold in the form of prizes or 
rewards. When trouble does arise, the champion is 
the first in line to face it. In game effect: Food, 
drink and everyday items are now half price 
whilst in your community.
Hero (rank 7). The deeds of a hero are retold 
widely, often embellished. A hero is someone that 
the people admire and look up to; a role-model for 
their children. This doesn’t have to be simple 
bravery and skill at arms. A great playwright 
might become so famous and popular that they 
become a hero, an explorer that brings back 
treasures and stories from far away could also be 
considered heroes. As with others who rise by 
popular acclaim there is no specific income 
associated with the role, but a hero will have 
access to people and places that would usually be 
denied to their ‘class’ and will be showered in gifts 
and help from admirers. Most of their wealth will 
come from their deeds (plunder etc). Many are 
known by a nickname that reflects their deeds e.g. 
Erwist, Master of the Thunder Seas. In game effect: 
You gain a follower of Novice rank and you may 
spend their skill points as you please.
Hero of Legend (9). As the fame and popularity of a 
person grows, they may find their exploits 
detailed in story and song. These people are now 
living legends, with the line between fiction and 
reality starting to blur - the warrior that slays a 
giant with a single blow, the sage that can answer 
any question. They still have to find a source of 
income for themselves, but few people will refuse 
an opportunity to spend time with or help a 
legend, and they are likely to be made welcome in 
the houses of the wealthy. Often they become 
known by a brief moniker, e.g. Seamaster Erwist, 
or just ‘The Seamaster’. In game effect: Each 
completed mission grants you 5d6gp extra in the 
form of gifts and treasures sent by admirers.


--- PAGE 249 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
248
Hero of Myth (11). The ultimate stage of popular 
acclaim - someone who is so widely admired and 
discussed that the line between fact and fiction 
becomes completely blurred. The explorer who 
travelled around the world faster than the wind, 
the artist whose paintings were so realistic they 
came to life and so on. The stories may become so 
ridiculous that the actual individual is a 
disappointment! Still, those that reach this level of 
fame are treated with respect and adoration across 
a wide section of society. Their presence is 
considered a great honour and they will invariably 
be showered with gifts and assistance. By this 
point, a hero of myth is often known just by a 
single name e.g. ‘Erwist’ being enough to strike 
fear into every pirate on the seas. In game effect: 
You no longer have to pay for food & 
accommodation whilst in your community and 
any normal item of less than 100gp value will be 
provided to you without charge (it’s assumed that 
you don’t resell them!). If you need it, your 
community will provide a militia of 5d6 soldiers 
(SKILL 7 STAMINA 10 Weapon: Sword Armour: 
Leather Hauberk and Small shield) that will serve 
you for up to a month.
Religious 
All religions are different, yet in some ways they are 
all the same. At the top there is either a single person 
(pope, high priest etc) or council that determines the 
doctrine of the church, based on either interpretation 
of sacred texts or direct communication with their 
god, and then passes that down through the 
organisation to promote the message and recruit 
followers.
Rising from a follower to the leader of a church can be 
a slow and involved process and there is a strong 
expectation that anyone taking a formal position in a 
religion will be expected to carry out religious duties 
(running a temple, holding ceremonies etc) which 
will probably prevent them from doing much 
adventuring. However, some churches may reward 
followers for carrying out extreme acts of heroism, 
provided they support the teachings of their god. At 
the lowest level the work of a religion is concerned 
with maintaining holy sites such as temples or 
shrines and preaching to the masses. Collecting 
donations is an important part of church work at 
every level and whilst the income of high ranking 
church members may be large it is expected that the 
bulk will be spent in the service of the church - 
charitable works (if appropriate), building and 
maintaining temples, commissioning artists to 
celebrate their god.
Churches often have branches in other parts of 
society, such as inquisitors which are para-military 
priests that might have ranks more closely related to 
the military classifications, or preachers that are not 
a8ached to a temple and are closer to folk heroes. 
Typical 
Motivations 
for 
Religious 
work 
are: 
Worshipping your god, defending your church and 
its followers, ba8ling against an opposed religion, 
pursuing 
a 
prophecy 
or 
vision, 
moral 
and 
philosophical convictions.
Minister (rank 4). Followers of the religion, 
ministers carry out day-to-day management of the 
church and holy sites. Only officiate minor 
ceremonies and may have other jobs besides their 
work with the church. Often any spare income is 
donated to the church. In game effect: +2 Religion 
Lore skill for your religion.
Priests (rank 6). Preachers, missionaries - they are 
charged with holding ceremonies and may be 
assigned a temple or holy site as their 
responsibility. Their income is expected to be used 
in service of the church although some personal 
spending is expected. In game effect: when 
defending a site connected to your religion, gain 
+1 to all skill rolls.


--- PAGE 250 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
249
Bishops, 
Prelates 
(rank 
8). 
Responsible 
for 
overseeing the behaviour of a number of priests, 
may also have their own holy site or temple to 
manage. A bishop will be provided with a 
residence and a small number of staff, such as a 
housekeeper, to assist them. Income is expected to 
be spent on maintaining a lifestyle appropriate to 
the religion.In game effect: are provided with a 
residence, a building owned by your church but 
put at your disposal. The residence comes with a 
small staff (cook, maid).
Archbishops (rank  9). Overseeing a large area or 
population and keeping control of the bishops 
whilst creating wider strategies for advancing the 
religion, often involving politics, are the jobs of an 
archbishop. In most cases they will be provided 
with a residence and staff by the church which 
they are expected to maintain to a high standard. 
As with other clergy their income is supposed to 
be spent in a way that reflects the teachings of the 
church, though of course this is not always the 
case. In game effect: You gain a follower of Novice 
rank, they must put two of the special skill points 
into Religion Lore and the remainder in Lore, 
Magical or Combat skills.
Cardinals (rank 10). Assistants to the high priest or 
pope, learned in church lore and responsible for 
turning the message of the church into teachings, 
ceremonies and advice which they then pass on to 
the Archbishops & wider clergy. Cardinals are 
also diplomats and envoys for the church and can 
speak on behalf of their leader. The church 
provides houses and a significant staff, in some 
luxury, but as usual the income of a cardinal 
should be used for the glory of the church.  In 
game effect: Your residence is larger and be8er 
appointed. It is connected to a site which is sacred 
to your church. The staff is increased and your 
church 
provides 
a 
significant 
budget 
for 
entertaining and events.
High Priest, Pope, Patriarch, Caliph, Prophet, Messiah 
(rank 11).  The earthly leader of the church, with 
ultimate responsibility to ensure that their god’s 
will is done on the mortal plane. They may claim 
to have direct contact with the deity but even if 
they don’t the high priest is the ultimate authority 
on what a follower of the religion should do or not 
do. Often involved with politics at the highest 
level, they may be seen as equal to or superior to 
monarchs. They will have a main residence at or 
near the most significant holy site, a large staff to 
support them and possibly a small personal army. 
As with other clergy, any ‘extra’ income should be 
spent on glorifying their god, often by building 
new temples or hiring artists to decorate the 
existing ones.  In game effect: You have a personal 
bodyguard of 2d6 warriors, provided by your 
church. They have SKILL 8 STAMINA 12 Weapon: 
Spear Armour: Breastplate & Small Shield.  They 
will try to accompany you at all times, like it or 
not. If any of them die they will be replaced in 2d6 
days. The church is very protective of you!
Academia (including scholars of magic)
Some people dedicate their lives to exploring the 
mysteries of the world in order to understand them, 
share their knowledge and put it to use in everyday 
life. An academic might be a teacher in a great 
university, but they could also be a lone inventor, 
magical researcher or seeker of lost knowledge. 
Academics rise in their field by either brilliant 
displays of intellect, or by the slower process of 
accumulating rare and valuable knowledge. They 
don’t always end up with riches, in fact many spend 
all the gold they can on acquiring rare books, strange 
devices or materials needed in their research, but a 
few do find some way of turning their discoveries 
into wealth. In a fantasy se8ing, academia includes 
those that dedicate their lives to studying aspects of 
magic such as wizards and sorcerers. More 
traditionally, academia also encompasses those who 


--- PAGE 251 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
250
study non-magical medicine, such as physicians and 
surgeons.
Academics may be unknown outside of their 
particular interests, but they are still respected, partly 
out of a desire not to look stupid!
Typical 
Motivations 
for 
Scholarly 
work 
are: 
Fascination with the subject, discovering ancient 
knowledge, proving your intelligence, superiority 
over others, insatiable curiosity or obsession, finding 
an answer to a great question or problem, outlet for 
an innate talent.
Student (Rank 4). Sometimes called an apprentice 
or pupil, the life of a student is rarely one of 
luxury. They must pay their tutor and have not yet 
acquired skills of worth, so they have only 
expenses and not income. Because of that most are 
the children of the already wealthy, with a 
sprinkling of a few brilliant but poor pupils that 
have been taken on out of charity. Graduating 
from student to researcher is at the mercy of their 
teachers. In game effect: Choose a specialist 
subject - you gain +2 on Knowledge skills related 
to this subject.
Researcher (Rank 5). Having acquired a basic 
understanding of their subject, the researcher is 
now expected to seek out their own knowledge 
usually as an assistant to a more senior academic. 
They can now expect to receive a small income for 
their work but unless they make some stupendous 
discovery it will be a meagre amount. The path to 
promotion is to find some part of their subject in 
which they can specialise. In game effect: You have 
access to a laboratory or library and gain +1 to 
relevant skill tests (usually knowledge based) 
when you are able to visit it.
Lecturer (Rank 6).  With years spent pondering the 
intricacies of their chosen subject, an academic 
finally gains some recognition with a stable 
income and the chance to take on students of their 
own. It is still unlikely to be a fortune unless they 
make a particularly valuable discovery, but they 
are now firmly on the path to higher things. In 
game effect: Other academics respect you; in a city 
you may seek them out to assist your research and 
gain a bonus (Directors discretion) to Knowledge 
or Magical special skill rolls.
Reader (Rank 7). A Reader, Senior Lecturer, or 
Assistant Professor has established themself as an 
authority on their subject, someone that other 
academics might come to for assistance. They will 
have students and researchers of their own and an 
income that reflects it. In game effect: You gain a 
follower of Novice rank, they must put two of the 
special skill points into a Lore skill related to your 
speciality and the remainder in Lore or Magical.
Professor (Rank 8). After decades of work a talented 
academic can rise to the point where they are 
considered a high authority on their subject and 
suitably informed to judge the work of others. 
People will seek out their opinion on ma8ers 
related to not just their specialism but also other 
ma8ers of thought and their opinions carry 
weight. All this respect comes with perks; a proper 
income and the chance to charge for access to your 
mind. In game effect: When you are not 
adventuring and living in or near a city or large 
population, you gain 5d6gp each month as 
payments for consultations.
Genius (Rank 10). Master, Sage, Philosopher - With 
enough talent and years of work behind them 
some academics or intellectuals become so well 
known that their fame reaches beyond the 
confines of their subject. They became widely 
renowned and celebrated across both their own 
realm and others. People flock to learn from them 


--- PAGE 252 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
251
and nobles and merchants invite them to come 
and offer advice or illumination. In game effect: 
When you visit a new city, you can contact 
academics that live there and ask for assistance; 
what you are offered is at the Directors discretion 
but could include accommodation, access to 
libraries and laboratories and introduction to 
important citizens or to secret / hidden knowledge 
that is usually restricted.
Military
Every military is different but they all have one thing 
in common; they all love to create ranks and 
structures to maintain organisation and ensure the 
chain of command functions. Ranks in the British 
army include (but are not limited to) private, 
corporal, sergeant, officer, lieutenant, captain, major, 
colonel, brigadier, general and field marshall. Clearly 
this is far more detailed than most people require in 
their adventures, though in some se8ings working 
your way up this type of structure can be the basis of 
an entire campaign. Promotion in the military is 
supposed to be based on bravery and leadership, but 
often comes down to patronage. The military 
structure is also applicable to groups such as police, 
mercenary organisations or watchmen.
Typical Motivations for Military work are: Love of 
combat, proving your valour, bloodlust, pursuit of 
physical perfection, desperation (no other options), 
forced enrolment (conscripted), loyalty to a kingdom 
or cause, pursuit of wealth (mercenary or pillage), 
family tradition.
Soldier (rank 3). A trooper, grunt, sailor or enlisted 
man. One of the cannon fodder. At this level a 
person has no choice about where and when they 
go. The hours are long, conditions terrible and the 
pay, when it arrives, barely enough to cover the 
cost of replacing your boots. Many soldiers spend 
their money on wine, women and song, and the 
rest they waste. In game effect: You are provided 
with a weapon and a leather hauberk, which you 
are expected to look after. You may sleep and eat 
in the ‘barracks’ when in your home location.
Officer (rank 4). An officer is in charge of a unit of 
troops, size depending on the structure of the 
military. Their main job is to make sure orders are 
carried out by the soldiers or seamen and in 
particular to stop them from routing in the face of 
danger. Officers get slightly be8er pay and 
conditions, but are still required to do as their 
superiors command and frequently have to 
purchase their own equipment. Pillaging is a 
significant source of income. In game effect: You 
have learned to be a bully when required - gain +1 
to your Con skill tests.
Captain (rank 5). In charge of a number of units 
making up a company and has some limited 
autonomy when it comes to giving orders. A 
captain will receive a decent income from the 
army and will be provided with reasonable 
accommodation, but they will also be expected to 
maintain a certain level of lifestyle. With many 
young men in the army, excessive drinking, 
gambling and entertaining is a common way to go 
broke. In game effect: You have gained skill in 
command, you have +1 to your Leadership tests.
Colonel (rank 7). The lowest rank of the command 
structure of the army, a colonel has the 
responsibility to act as liaison between the high 
level decision makers and the commanders in the 
field. Their ability to interpret those orders and 
how exactly they should be implemented makes 
the difference between a good and bad colonel. As 
a senior figure in the army they receive a good 
level of pay, topped up with pillage and some 
‘redirection’ of the military budget. In game effect: 
You gain a follower of Novice rank, a young 
warrior eager to learn from you, they must put 
their skill points into Combat and Movement 
special skills.


--- PAGE 253 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
252
General (rank 9). A member of the command who 
has the job of interpreting military intelligence and 
turning it into plans of action. They may or may 
not be in the field; the outcome of ba8les often 
depends on their ability to make the right call 
about troop deployments and tactics. In addition 
to their pay, most generals will also receive land 
and holdings, plus the not inconsiderable 
opportunities demand favours from the trade 
princess in return for military assistance. On the 
downside, making the wrong call might well be 
fatal. In game effect: You gain a horse or other 
appropriate mount and a holding (land or rights 
over a trade) that provides you with 1d6 x 100gp 
each year. In addition you are provided with 
masterwork weapons and armour.
Field Marshall (rank 11). Responsible for an entire 
theatre of war, reports directly to the heads of the 
armed forces (usually the nobility or rulers) and 
rarely a8ends the front lines. A field marshall 
advises the rulers about the overall strength of the 
armies and navies, ways to improve them and the 
costs involved. They are often given noble ranks 
for their service with the usual land and holdings 
to supplement their income but the really big 
money comes from pillage; a smart field marshall 
will be on hand to pick up the best pieces of 
plunder. On the downside, they can be held 
personally responsible for a failure and see their 
riches, or their lives, stripped from them. In game 
effect: Your holdings now provide 5d6x100gp each 
year and you can call upon your organisations 
forces as you desire; however, your actions can 
lead to swift punishment if you upset the rulers of 
whichever kingdom or land they represent.
Nobility
The purpose of the nobility is to defend the realm and 
manage land and trade. However they are organised 
and whatever their ranks are called, these are the 
people who own the land, decide the rules of trade 
and raise militias and armies to defend it. Referred to 
as ‘my Lord / Lady’, a good noble makes the best use 
of their holdings and gains the respect and 
admiration of the people, whereas a bad or cruel one 
will become a tyrant to those peasants unfortunate 
enough to live on their land. Promotion and 
demotion in the noble ranks are either by inheritance 
or patronage. Many titles pass from parent to child - 
often father to son but not always - and gaining new 
titles or advancing requires a higher ranked person to 
sponsor the advance.
At the head of the nobility is the monarchy (king, 
queen, prince, princess) which are referred to as ‘Your 
highness’ or ‘Your majesty’. Often the monarchy is 
referred to as ‘the house of so-and-so’. Joining this 
rank is generally only possible by accident of birth or 
marriage.
Typical Motivations for a career in the Nobility are: 
Family tradition, pursuit of status or power, vanity, 
loyalty to a kingdom or nation, sponsorship by a 
patron, political influence, pursuit of wealth.
Knight (rank 6). A knight holds the title ‘sir’ but is 
not considered a Lord or truly part of the nobility. 
They are trusted retainers and vassals of the lord 
or lady, usually in some military role. Becoming a 
knight is often the first step towards higher 
ennoblement. A knight’s income comes from their 
personal holdings and estate, they are expected to 
purchase their knightly equipment, such as 
horses, a lance, armour and so on, which means 
that many knights are quite poor unless they have 
some income from pillaging or from a wealthy 
sponsor.  In game effect: You are granted title to a 
small parcel of land (or other holdings) which 


--- PAGE 254 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
253
grants you 2d6 x 10gp income each year. You gain 
+2 to Bargain & Etique8e tests when dealing with 
others who owe allegiance to the same Lord and 
+1 when dealing with other nobility.
Baron (rank 7). Owner of a small parcel of land 
worked by serfs and peasants, the job of the baron 
is to maintain law and order, keep the peasants 
working and, along with any knights, lead them in 
ba8le. The income of a baron will depend on the 
quality of their land and people and their ability to 
manage them well. Some of the peasants will be 
servants to the baron. In game effect: Your land (or 
other holdings) are increased granting you 2d6 x 
20gp income each year. In addition you gain a 
follower of novice rank. You are expected to 
maintain a house or residence of some sort.
Viscount (rank 8). A step up from a baron, a 
viscount has both holdings and additional duties 
and responsibilities such as trade rights at a small 
port, castellan of a castle, judge and so on which 
will provide an additional source of income. They 
are generally learned people capable of more than 
just farming. Will have a decent house or manor 
and a small household staff, some of their income 
will be spent on ceremonial clothing and 
trappings. In game effect: In addition to your 
holdings you are given a position of importance 
that provides another 2d6 x 20gp income each 
year, provided you spend at least one week 
performing your duties.
Earl or Count (rank 9). Owner of a significant area 
of land, probably encompassing one or more 
towns. Their duties are similar to a baron’s but 
they don’t deal directly with the peasants. They 
will have one or more good quality homes and a 
staff to manage them. They may be expected to 
a8end court and will own appropriate clothing 
and trappings. In game effect: Your holdings and 
lands have increased again, now providing  2d6 x 
100gp income each year. In addition you are 
expected to a8end court at least once a year. You 
are expected to maintain a reasonably grand 
residence in which you can entertain other nobles.
Marquess, Margrave (rank 10). An earl or count that 
is favoured by the monarch and on their way to 
becoming a duke. As well as owning land, they 
will have a manor or estate and staff to run it, and 
they are likely to have a specific role to play at 
court or on behalf of the monarch which might 
become a significant expense. In game effect: Your 
holdings and lands have increased again, now 
providing  2d6 x 500gp income each year. You are 
expected to maintain a grand residence, fully 
staffed, in which you can entertain other nobles.
Duke (rank 11). Owner of a large area of land called 
a Duchy. As well as promoting the wealth of their 
duchy through farming and trade they are 
charged with ensuring that military strength is 
well trained and available to the monarchy when 
needed. Expected to a8end court regularly and 
house the monarch when they are travelling, a 
duty which can be an exorbitant cost particularly 
if they are trying to impress their ruler. A duke is 
expected to dress and behave like a duke; a lot of 
their income is spent on maintaining appearances. 
In game effect: Your holdings and lands have 
increased again, now providing  2d6 x 1,000gp 
income each year. You are expected to a8end court 
or be in contact with your monarch on a regular 
basis. Your residence, style and bearing are 
expected to be of high quality and the monarch 
will censure you if they are not. You will be given 
a position that is important to your kingdom, e.g. 
ambassador, commander of the army, chief judge 
etc.
Monarch (rank 12).  The King, Queen, Sultan, Tzar, 
Emperor and so on. Depending on the society they 
may be an absolute ruler - in which case the wealth 
of the entire realm is available to them - or they 
may be restrained in some way by other important 


--- PAGE 255 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
254
groups (the nobility, churches, trade princes etc). 
They will certainly own a great deal of land and 
houses, with their wealth being used to maintain 
and improve these properties. A monarch is 
expected to maintain a court along with all its 
trappings (food, entertainment etc) and these 
costs, along with the costs of defending the realm, 
often mean the monarch controls great wealth but 
struggles to hold on to it. A smart monarch spends 
within their means, but a foolish one can end up in 
debt and at risk of losing their throne.In game 
effect: Your holdings and lands have increased 
again, now providing  2d6 x 5,000gp income each 
year. You are expected to acquire a fully staffed 
palace and hold court, most of your time will be 
occupied by dealing with the other nobles and 
affairs of state. You can command your armies and 
people to make war, if you are able to persuade the 
other nobles of the cause. 
Secret or Private Societies
The hardest to describe, because they will all vary 
according to their purposes and history, but we can 
describe a few similarities. They have a purpose, 
which means a leadership that sets out what that 
purpose is, agents that put it into action, members 
who assist (often financially) and initiates that are on 
their way to full membership. Unlike other 
organisations the social rank of these clubs only 
ma8ers within the society or to those that respect it. 
For example, the head of a crime syndicate would be 
respected by its members and people that recognised 
them, but a stranger might well treat them as merely 
a criminal - an encounter that is unlikely to end well! 
Not all secret or private societies are malicious; an 
explorers club or guardians of an ancient treasure 
could fall into this category.  Promotion within the 
society will generally be in the hands of its leaders 
and income and expenses depend heavily on its 
nature. A crime syndicate will be risky but 
rewarding, a society dedicated to keeping an ancient 
secret will probably not come with much in the way 
of earnings.
Typical Motivations for joining a secret or private 
society are: Uncovering lost or hidden knowledge, 
criminal or outlaw ventures, loyalty to the leader, 
privacy or secrecy, paranoia, pursuit of unusual 
ambitions, belief in a prophecy, safeguarding a great 
secret, a duty passed down in your family.
Initiate (Rank 3 within the Society). Just brought into 
the group, the initiate will be expected to carry out 
the wishes of the higher ups without question; 
they will also be expected to pay some form of fee 
or tribute as part of their membership. Promotion 
comes from being loyal and capable. In game 
effect: You’ve learnt some basics of using codes 
and markers, you gain +1 to your Secret Signs skill 
tests.
Member (Rank 5 within the Society). After proving 
their loyalty an initiate might be taken on as a full 
member; sometimes this means learning new 
secrets or mysteries or just taking on new 
responsibilities. A member has some respect but 
they are still tools of the masters. In game effect: 
Pick a Lore skill that is relevant to your secret or 
private society (Sea Lore for a group of Mariners) 
- the experience point cost of increasing that skill 
is halved. If this is a criminal society you may 
choose Con or City Lore.
Agent (Rank 7 within the Society). An experienced 
member will be allowed to make their own 
decisions and make demands of initiates or 
members, within certain parameters. An agent 
will have their own area of responsibility, though 
it may be small. In game effect: At the Director’s 
discretion you can call upon the resources of your 
secret or private society to aid you when carrying 
out activities that are relevant to the cause e.g. An 
explorers club would help provide funds and 
equipment for an expedition to an unknown 
island.


--- PAGE 256 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
255
Enforcer (Rank 9 within the Society). A more senior 
agent that is tasked with checking on the others 
(and members and initiates) and taking steps to 
keep them in line. An enforcer will be broadly 
known and respected within the group. In game 
effect: You gain a follower of Novice rank, a person 
whose interests align with your group. they must 
put their skill points into special skills that are 
appropriate to your ‘interests’. 
Master (Rank 11 within the Society). A loyal and 
competent member may eventually rise to the 
position of master, someone who knows the 
secrets and plans of the society and helps direct it 
towards its goals. A master will expect instant 
obedience from the lesser ranks. In game effect: 
When in a location important to your society you 
can call upon 2d6 initiates (SKILL 6 STAMINA 10 
Weapon: Axe Armour: Leather Hauberk) to assist 
you; this can be done at most once per month. You 
do not need to explain yourself.
Grand Master (Rank 12 within the Society). If the 
group has a supreme leader, this is it. The grand 
master knows all the mysteries and lore, and 
controls the lower ranks like a puppet master. To 
those within the society, the grand master is on a 
par with any ruler or high priest of their realm.  In 
game effect: Choose a location that acts as the 
headquarters for your society. You can now treat 
this as your home and use its facilities as you 
desire. The headquarters should be appropriate to 
your society and should be of good but not 
opulent character (so a large house or tower, but 
not a keep or palace).
Mercantile
The pursuit of riches through purely business 
acumen is a common occupation and is respected, if 
not always loved in most societies. There is no formal 
structure to advancement in this field, it’s all about 
how much gold you can accumulate. A hugely 
successful farmer, with many acres of land, would be 
higher in status than a struggling art dealer. Positions 
in this endeavour are measured in results, not titles.
Typical Motivations for joining a Mercantile career 
are: Pursuit of wealth and status, family inheritance, 
talent for business, desperation (escape from 
poverty), means to an end, competitive instinct, 
funding another aim, revenge (destroying another 
merchant), funding other aims, exploitation.
Peasant (Rank 3). ‘Basic economic unit’ may seem 
like an insult but it is a fair description. Peasants 
make up the largest part of the population and do 
most of the actual work; their opportunities to 
escape poverty are limited. Unlike a slave or a serf 
a peasant has the right to earn a bit of coin for 
themselves. A smart or lucky peasant finds a way 
to move up the ladder through skill, persuasion or 
sometimes dishonesty. In game effect: None. Good 
Luck!
Crafter (Rank 4).  Someone who has established a 
skill at a particular craft or trade, e.g. shoemaker, 
butcher, farrier etc. No longer expected to carry 
out drudge work, a crafter (often an apprentice) 
has taken the first step toward some form of 
wealth. Frequently, taking up a trade involves 
joining a guild that regulates and controls it. In 
game effect: Pick a Crafting special skill and gain 
one point in it. You can earn 1d6gp a week from 
your skills, provided you have access to a 
workshop and tools.


--- PAGE 257 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
256
Trader (Rank 5). There are only so many hours in 
the day, so in order to become wealthy a person 
needs to learn to trade; effectively making a profit 
from the work of others. A trader has set up a 
business and spends less time doing the work and 
more time managing it and establishing links with 
other traders. As with a crafter, this will probably 
have to be done with the approval of a guild or 
guilds that manage the trade. In game effect: You 
spend a lot of time haggling and negotiating; gain 
+1 to your Bargain skill rolls. Your trading brings 
in 2d6gp per week if you devote your time to it.
Owner (Rank 7). A business that grows eventually 
needs premises, equipment and employees, with 
the owner at the top directing operations and 
reaping the profits. With the money coming in, a 
business owner starts to get more a8ention from 
other parts of society, usually looking for a 
handout!  In game effect: If you acquire a premises 
(shop or workshop) your business will now 
provide you with 1d6gp per week in profit, or 
3d6gp per week if you devote your time to it. 
Dealing with others grants you one point in either 
the Law or Languages skills.
Merchant (Rank 8). A truly successful owner will 
continue to expand their operations; multiple 
workshops, varied routes of trade, a wider 
product range, warehouses and maybe ships and 
wagons. A business becomes a widely known 
enterprise, with activity in more than one location 
and money flowing through it like lifeblood. A 
merchant may not be ‘noble’ but they will 
certainly find the higher-ups in society treating 
them with respect. In game effect: You gain a 
follower of Novice rank, a person whose interests 
align with your group. they must put their skill 
points into special skills that are appropriate to 
your ‘interests’. Your business has now grown to 
cover several locations and brings in 4d6gp per 
week in profit if you make a Bargain skill test, or 
2d6gp if you fail the test. 
Merchant Prince (Rank 11). The pinnacle of 
economic 
success, 
a 
merchant 
prince 
has 
accumulated vast wealth. With their fingers in a 
number of economic pies, they will be owners of 
one or more significant businesses and have 
control of a significant trade. Control over an 
important spice route, ownership of a fleet of 
ships, control over the gem trade within a 
kingdom would all be examples of what it takes to 
become a merchant prince. With this level of 
wealth there comes enormous power in other 
areas and there will be a long line of people 
seeking them out for help and assistance. The 
trappings of a merchant prince will be very similar 
to those of the highest nobility and many seek out 
opportunities to flaunt their riches.  In game effect: 
Your business has now grown into a web of 
interests and activities that creates a constant 
stream of problems to solve. You gain one skill 
point in two of City Lore, Bargain, Law or 
Languages as you try to cope. It brings in 2d6 x 
10gp per week in profit if you make a Bargain skill 
test, or 1d6 x 10gp if you fail the test.
Other Options for Handling Social Rank
The system presented for earning and using social 
status with Advanced Fighting Fantasy is intended to 
be a more complete and rounded set of rules than 
those provided in the main rulebook, in which the 
concept of Social Rank is introduced but not fully 
elaborated on. There are of course many other ways 
in which status can be handled and it is up to you to 
decide how much time and effort you want to put 
into working out the status and occupation of your 
hero. Some other options include:
• Handling social status in an abstract way - you 
can ignore the numbering system and simply 
decide, based on the situation, how much respect 
your hero deserves and whether or not this 
translates into bonuses and penalties to use skills 
such as Etique8e, Bargain, Con and Leadership


--- PAGE 258 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
257
• Mixed / Limited status - you can use the ranks 
provided in this section as a guide but only in a 
limited way. A hero might be hugely popular with 
their own people but also go around dressed and 
acting like a beggar. They would have two, 
entirely separate, social ranks.
• Simplified Ranks - rather than using a 2-12 
system you can assign your heroes as belonging to 
low, moderate or high rank and apply a straight 
penalty of -3 when trying to interact with someone 
of higher status. This is faster but it is also less 
clear as to what your status actually means or how 
you change it.
Overall, this system is based on the types of 
hierarchies common in mediaeval fantasy se8ings in 
which powerful nobles, priests, warriors or wizards 
are accorded enormous respect and power and part 
of being a hero is ascending to those ranks. The way 
in which you handle this in your se8ing and 
campaign is up to you.
Followers
As heroes rise in power and status, they may a8ract a 
follower - not just another NPC but one that is willing 
to follow the hero into danger and do as they say 
(within reason, they are not supposed to be mindless 
slaves). The follower should be created as if it was a 
hero, but one that is of lower ‘rank’.
If you have it available, the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy Heroes Companion provides rules for 
hirelings which can be used to create followers, or 
you can create one as if you were creating a new hero. 
In the AFF Rulebook a hero is created with 8 
improvement points to adjust their characteristics 
(SKILL, STAMINA, LUCK, MAGIC). A follower 
should be created as a ‘novice’ with only 5 
improvement points for characteristics and 6 points 
of special skills.
Followers do not have to be of the same ‘type’ as the 
hero though they should start off as someone that is 
following the same path. A wizard can have a fighter 
as a follower, a thief might a8ract a priest to their side 
(perhaps to try and mend their ways). It is up to you 
to create your follower and explain why they are 
a8ached to you.
You are not obliged to take a follower when one 
becomes available; if you prefer to play as a lone wolf 
you can simply ignore this option and leave it for 
another time.
Releasing a follower: You can, at any time, order your 
follower to leave your service and make their own 
way. If you wish them to come back into your service,  
you will have to find them and take a test of your 
leadership skill to convince them. If you are entitled 
to a follower (due to your social rank) another 
candidate will appear in 1d6 weeks; you are not 
obliged to accept them.
Follower Experience: If your follower accompanies on 
your adventures they gain experience but at a slower 
rate than you. For every four points of experience you 
gain, your followers get one.


--- PAGE 259 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
258
Example: Jay ‘Fingers’ Finch has gained the respect of ‘The 
Surly Boys’, a criminal gang operating in and around 
Ludria. This is treated as a secret society and once Jay 
reaches the level of ‘Enforcer’ (Social Rank 9 within the 
gang) he finds that a young criminal has been so impressed 
with his antics that he wants to travel with Jay and learn 
from him. Jay creates a novice hero using the 5 
improvement points to give him SKILL 5 STAMINA 12 
LUCK 11 (he is human) and put our 6 skills points into 
combat and movement - 2 points in Sneaking and one each 
in Thrown, Climb, Awareness and Locks. We need to come 
up with a name for him (Kol ‘Clubber’ Tump) and provide 
him with some basic equipment. ‘Clubber’ Tump is willing 
to accompany Jay on his mission and act as muscle or a 
lookout, but what role he plays is up to Jay. He can take 
Clubber with him on his adventures, or tell him to stay at 
home and await instructions. 
Further customisation: Those interested in creating 
followers and customising them may wish to refer to 
the Advanced Fighting Fantasy Heroes Companion, 
which has a chapter on hirelings and their abilities. 
Followers are not intended to be mercenaries - they 
have chosen to follow and assist the hero - but many 
of the rules and ideas that apply to hirelings can also 
be applied to followers.
7.3 Creating Factions
Whilst this book is focused on creating games for 
heroes either solo or in small groups, it is worth 
noting that the rules provided can be used to create 
factions, which you may wish to do if you are 
running a longer campaign with some level of 
political intrigue.
In order to build up a picture of a faction, we need to 
work out some details such as are they good or evil, 
interested in war or politics and so on. The ‘domain’, 
location, race (main race, factions can include more 
than one type of person) and motivation for a faction 
can all be taken from the ‘Generated Villains’ (section 
9.2).  Combine this with the Political Systems & 
Religion tables ( section 7.1) to give you the outline of 
their behaviour. The leader of the faction can be 
created using the rules for creating villains or simply 
based on what you already know about it (A faction 
that is obsessed with religious ma8ers will be led by 
a priest, a faction that is obsessed with politics will 
have a demagogue as its leader and so on). 
A few extra elements are required - the size of the 
faction and their level of secrecy, which can be easily 
generated.
d6 
Faction Size
1 
Small. This group or faction has few members and meeting them is rare.
2-5 
Moderate: This group has a significant presence and meeting a member is unremarkable.
6 
Large: This group has a lot of members and meeting them is commonplace.
 
 
A second roll on this table can tell you how the faction is changing: 
1: Shrinking
2-5: Stable
6: Growing.
d6 
Faction Secrecy
1 
Hidden: This group of people try and hide their membership and activities from the wider population.
2-5 
Indifferent: This group does not hide or proclaim their activities or membership.
6 
Public: This group actively proclaims and declares their activities and membership.


--- PAGE 260 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
259
Combining these details or facets should give you a 
pre8y rounded description of your new faction. Ideas 
for the social structure and titles within the faction 
can be obtained from the section on Social Status & 
Ranks ( section 7.2). It is up to the player or Director 
to turn all these elements into a fleshed out account of 
what the faction is and what it does. A faction can 
simply be a part of your world or they can be the 
reason for missions and quests to happen - if that is 
the case, treat them as a villain and create your 
missions according to the usual rules.
As we are drawing elements from different parts of 
this book it is worth giving an example to show how 
it works.
Janay The Just, a priestess of Libra, is spending a week 
relaxing in Ludria and decides to spends some time in the 
inns and taverns hearing rumours about the world she 
lives in (in out of game terms, the Director is going to 
create some factions for her to interact with). The Director 
starts rolling dice and it goes as follows.
Step 1: From the Generated Villains section, 9.2.
Domain - 2:  
Fury of the Gods - the faction is 
religious in some way
Location - 5:  Dungeon - the faction base is in a 
dungeon
Race - 1:  
Human - may include other races but 
the majority are human
Motivation - 3: (From the Fury of the Gods motivation 
table): Prophecy - they believe in an 
ancient prophecy, nothing can be 
allowed to prevent it from happening 
as ordained.
Lair - 5:  
A tower, full of strange and dangerous 
objects. The Director decides that, for 
the moment, this tower will be above 
the dungeon.
Henchman - 4: Tree men, which can be used for  
 
 
 
encounters with this faction
Retaliation - 3: Animated Club (maybe they have
access to some wood based magic?)
Ba8le Tactics  - not required at this point, as it is only
available to villains, not rank and file  
 
personnel
Step 2: From the Political Systems & Religions 
section. 7.1.
Morality - 2:  Neutral (if you wish to create a 
‘villain’ faction you may want to  
 
 
choose ‘evil’).
Control - 6:  
Strong 
Gods - 8:  
Worship the neutral gods - determine 
that to be Aqualis (god of rivers) from 
the religion table (this part may not be 
relevant to all factions. Those that 
pursue the ‘Fury of the Gods’ will 
need to be assigned a specific god, but 
other factions do not have to be).
Step 3: Using the tables in this section.
Size - 4:  
Moderate (5: Stable)
Secrecy - 1:  
Hidden
In the Social Structure & Ranks section 7.2, we have 
no dice to roll but instead, based on what information 
we have so far, we can decide that this is either a 
religious based organisation or perhaps a secret 
society. The fact that it is ‘Hidden’ means the Director 
decides it is a mix of secret society and religious 
organisation that can have ranks from both. It will be 
led by a high priest of Aqualis, but also include 
members that have no priestly powers and are, 
broadly speaking, cultists, though this doesn’t mean 
they are evil, just that they are ultimately dedicated to 
a religious cause but are hiding their purpose from 
outsiders. We can create ranks for this organisation 
such as ‘wetfoot’ for an initiate, ‘mudlark’ for a full 
member, ‘heron’ for a senior person and ‘king of the 
river’ for the leader. Use the descriptions of social 
status given earlier in this chapter to assign them a 
social rank.


--- PAGE 261 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
260
Final Step: Blend it Together.
Taking what we have rolled into consideration we 
decide that the faction is a cult of Aqualis dedicated 
to an ancient prophecy concerning their god (to be 
decided later on, perhaps to do with some kind of 
great flood they believe to be imminent). They are 
based in a dungeon on top of which stands an ancient 
tower, guarded by Tree Men (is this part of the 
prophecy?) and their access to some kind of wood 
based magic allows them to send animated clubs to 
target those that bother them. They have a decent 
number of members (boatmen? Fishermen? People 
who work on or near rivers could all be members) 
and are hidden from the general population. This is 
not because they are evil, merely secretive, but they 
are good at staying out of sight (strong control).
 We don’t know yet if they are going to be an ally or 
enemy for Janay the Just, but now we know they exist 
in the world, we can work them into our stories and 
adventures. We could, for example, create a villain 
based on this faction (their leader or high priest) and 
create missions using them as an opponent. Or, we 
can simply include members of this faction in the 
background scenery of the world, perhaps as allies or 
acquaintances for Janay as she goes about her 
adventures. 
7.4 Hero Backgrounds: AFF Lifepaths
Many people enjoy creating complex backgrounds 
for their heroes based on the story they wish to tell, 
but sometimes a li8le bit of help with inspiration is 
helpful. In this section we provide some ideas to help 
you build up the background and character of your 
hero; these are entirely optional and are designed to 
help you flesh out the origin of your hero, they are 
not expected to constrain you. Thus, if you find you 
roll something that you dislike or don’t understand, 
you should feel free to reroll it or replace it with your 
own invention. The deeper point is that you should 
think about where your hero came from and what 
sort of person they are.
These options are meant to be used in addition to the 
normal process of creating a hero, though they may 
help you to decide which special skills you want to 
develop.
What sort of person is my hero?
In order to work out what sort of person our hero is, 
we can begin by asking ourselves a series of questions 
relating to their background. Not all the questions 
have to be answered in full and exhaustive detail; 
some of them can be left vague or blank, to be filled in 
later when you have a moment of inspiration about 
your hero’s character.
Physical appearance. Unlike many games, Advanced 
Fighting Fantasy does not require you to record 
precise details of things like height, weight, shoe size 
and so on. Humans come in all shapes and sizes, 
elves are generally tall and slender and dwarves are 
short and broad, but within each group there is a lot 
of variation. As well as these measurements you 
might also want to give your hero a distinguishing 
feature - perhaps a scar, a birthmark, a limp or a 
particularly memorable hairstyle. Once you have 
decided, record it on your character sheet.


--- PAGE 262 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
261
Age. There are no modifiers based on age to apply, 
but of course it is important to your hero. If they 
happen to be very young there might be a particular 
reason why they have left home at a tender age to go 
adventuring. If they are older, you should think of 
what it is they did with their life before starting out 
on their quest and why they decided to leave their old 
life behind. Humans have a normal lifespan, Elves 
live for two hundred to two hundred and fifty years 
and dwarves lie somewhere between, with one 
hundred to a hundred and fifty as their usual allo8ed 
time. Your hero can be young, old or any age in 
between - this does not impact your characteristics or 
skill points.
Origin. Where is your hero from? There are three 
great continents on Titan (Allansia, Khul and The Old 
World) each of which contain wilderness, towns and 
cities. A hero can be from any of these and come from 
any environment - you can be from a great capital or 
a tiny village lost in a swamp. If you have the maps 
available, take a look and pick out somewhere that 
you like. Your place of origin should be reflected in 
your choice of Region Lore skills that you take. 
Humans 
are 
widely 
spread 
across 
every 
environment, elves tend to live in places of great 
natural beauty and dwarves often make their homes 
underground, but every group has its exceptions.
The Gods. A hero that is playing as a priest or 
paladin must choose a god to follow, but for others 
this is a more open question. Does your hero have a 
particular faith, or no faith, or simply acknowledges 
all the gods without engaging in worship? The gods 
are fairly active and important on Titan, so it is a rare 
person that ignores them.
Family & Clan. What was your family background 
and what sort of society did they live in? What was 
their social status? This does not have to determine 
what skills you learn, but it might be something that 
affects the way you develop your hero over time. 
Most people on Titan are labourers or craftsmen of 
one type or another, but some are merchants, scribes, 
nobles or soldiers. If your family background was 
particularly different, make a note of it.
The Hero’s Motivation. Why did you become a hero? 
What were you doing before you decided to start 
adventuring? In Section 7.2 ‘Social Status & Rank’ we 
have listed some possible motivations for you, but 
there are uncountable reasons why your hero took up 
their sword or spellbook. Try to think of one that suits 
the rest of your story.
Allies & Enemies: Who do you love or hate, and who 
loves or hates you? Have you got a particular group 
you want to protect or harm? Do you have specific 
friends or allies you can turn to when things are 
tough?
Asking ourselves these questions can help us build a 
picture of who our hero is and why they have 
decided to set out on their quest.
In addition to these details, we can add some more 
colour and depth to our hero’s background by rolling 
on the following tables that relate to their birth and 
life before they heard the call of adventure.
Birth Month
Throughout the course of the year on Titan as the 
seasons come and go, the influence of the gods is felt 
as they make their presence known. It should be clear 
that this has no effect on the character of the person - 
those born in the seventh month of the year, as 
Glantanka shows her face, are no more likely to be 
good than those born in other months. 
There are two main calendars on Titan, Allansian and 
Khulian - we have combined them into one table, as 
the gods abide by their own schedules!


--- PAGE 263 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
262
Table 7.4.1 Birth Month & Effect
 
 
Month
    1d6  
Allansian 
Khulian 
 
Effect
1-3 
1 
Freeze 
Snow’s Cloak 
Blessing of Farigiss: You try to keep the temperature low and 
dislike the heat. You reduce cold damage by 1 point of 
STAMINA, increase fire damage by 1 point of STAMINA. 
 
2 
Dark  
Skies in Darkness 
Eyes of Arhallogen: You are happiest when the light is low. 
The penalty for fighting blind is reduced from -6 to -4, you 
find bright lights painful and can be momentarily blinded if 
suddenly exposed.
 
3 
Unlocking 
Land’s Awakening 
Galana’s Sharing: You have an innate understanding of 
growing things and gain +1 to Plant Lore skill tests and +1 
to Monster Lore skill tests for plants and mutated animals. 
In addition, plants and animals under your care will be 
healthier and more bountiful.
 
4 
Sowing 
Heaven’s Weeping 
Stormchild: Sukh, the god of storms, blesses the land at this 
time. You enjoy stormy weather and reduce damage from   
 
lightning based a8acks by one point.
 
5 
Winds  
Birds Cha=er  
Pangara’s Sweeping: You are swift as the wind and have +1 to 
skill tests when racing against someone on foot.
 
6 
Warming 
Days Lengthen 
Courga’s encouragement: You are a naturally positive and 
optimistic person, you have a +2 bonus on tests to resist fear 
or terror.
4-6 
1 
Fire 
 
Corn Ripening 
Glantanka’s shining:  You like it hot and shiver as soon as you 
get cold. You reduce fire damage by 1 point of STAMINA, 
increase cold damage by 1 point of STAMINA. 
 
2 
Watching 
Man’s Harvesting
Galana’s Reaping: Born to the sound of the scythe, you gain 
+1 to combat rolls against plant life and mutated animals 
and can harvest one extra meal when butchering a carcass.
 
3 
Reaping 
Forests Golden
Filash’s touch: Often born with auburn hair the last blaze of 
summer fills you with energy. You are adept at sarting fires 
and add +1 damage when using fire as a weapon.
 
4 
Hiding 
Nature’s Curling
Logaan’s concealment: Just as the animals hibernate or store 
away food, you are adept at hiding yourself and other 
objects, you gain +1 to skill tests when doing so.
 
5 
Close  
Sun’s Hiding 
Disease’s Touch: As chills and flu take hold, you shrug off 
diseases reducing their duration by one day and gaining +1 
to tests against disease.
 
6 
Locking 
Land’s Sleeping
Death’s Pardon: Born during a lean time of the year, if you go 
without food for a day, you only lose one point of 
STAMINA instead of two.


--- PAGE 264 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
263
Birth Year
The years on Titan go on a twenty year cycle with 
each year having an associated animal. You will need 
to decide for yourself what year your campaign is 
taking place in and then work back to find the animal 
associated with your birth year. 
The order of the years is Dragon, Lion, Snake, Ox, 
Tiger, Goat, Mouse, Deer, Bat, Wolf, Eagle, Dog, 
Spider, Rabbit, Fox, Crocodile, Owl, Cat, Shark and 
Horse.
Heroes find they have a special innate connection 
with the creature of their birth year. They gain a +2 
bonus to  Animal Lore and Animal Handling tests 
relating to the animal of your birth year, so someone 
born in the Year of the Mouse has an affinity with 
mice and other small rodents and gains a bonus to 
their skill tests when interacting with them.
The extent to which this bonus applies is up to the 
Director, they might decide that someone born in the 
Year of The Bat has a natural affinity with bats, they 
might ignore that hero in combat or they might 
indeed be able to communicate with them to some 
extent. The exception to this would be the year of the 
Dragon - as intelligent creatures, they have li8le 
interest in the birthday of its food!
The year on Titan described in the source books is 248 
AC (248 After Chaos, which started from the year 
1999 Old Time).
Starting Wealth
All heroes start with the basic equipment (See ‘Hero 
Creation’ in the AFF Rulebook), bought or scavenged 
in preparation for adventuring.  Your starting wealth 
roll replaces the 2d6gp that heroes start with 
according to the usual rules.
This does not have an effect on your social rank. You 
can be a rich peasant (perhaps you found a stash of 
gold coins just before you decided to become an 
adventurer) or a poor lord (you have land and titles 
but they are mismanaged and you are constantly 
broke). It’s up to you to explain what the starting 
wealth of your hero means.
If your hero has chosen the ‘Status’ or ‘Knighted’ 
talents, you may wish to ignore this table.
Alternative Starting Wealth. 
2d6 
 
Human  
 
 
Elf 
 
 
 
Dwarf
2 
 
Destitute - 1d6sp 
 
Lowly - 1d6gp  
 
Poor - 1d6gp
3-5 
 
Poor - 1d6gp  
 
Lowly - 1d6gp  
 
Poor - 1d6gp
6-9 
 
Average - 2d6gp 
 
Average - 2d6gp 
 
Average - 2d6gp
10-11  
Wealthy - 4d6gp 
 
Highborne - 4d6gp 
 
Comfortable - 4d6gp 
12 
 
Rich - 6d6gp  
 
Highborne - 4d6gp 
 
Wealthy - 6d6gp
Childhood Life Experience
There are many important events that happen during 
childhood, memories and influences that will shape 
your life as an adult, but as a future hero there might 
be something in your background of particular 
relevance, something that will help you in your 
adventures. If you want to, come up with something 
unique for yourself and as a general rule remember it 
should not be too powerful. 


--- PAGE 265 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
264
Table 7.4.2 Unusual Life Experience
1d6 
 
Unusual Life Experience
1 
1 
You were visited by fairies - pick one minor magic spell that you can cast 2xday without a casting 
roll or magic points.
 
2 
You were anointed with cockatrice blood at birth and you are immune to petrification.
 
3 
For reasons that are unclear, you can speak Draconic, the language of dragons. This does not 
mean they will be nice to you.
 
4 
You trained with a grizzled old warrior who showed you how to use an unusual weapon - you   
have learned an exotic weapon such as whips, firepowder weapons, spiked gauntlet or 
something else of your choice. You have one point in the related special skill.
 
5 
You knew or were apprenticed to a mage and had access to a library and are proficient at finding 
information. If you have access to a library, add +2 to any Lore skill tests.
 
6 
Trader - you have been taught the art of haggling and can increase or decrease prices by 10% in 
addition to any other modifiers. You have one point in the Bargain special skill.
2 
1 
You were apprenticed to become a sailor - you have +2 to tests involving tying or untying knots   
 
 
and +1 to Sea Lore tests.
 
2 
You encountered a shaman that opened your third eye; you have one point in the Second Sight 
skill even if you have no points in MAGIC; a successful test of the skill will (in your case) allow 
you to spot invisible creatures and regardless of other characteristics you always have to roll at 
worst a 7 or less to succeed in your Second Sight skill test.
 
3 
Whilst swimming in a lake or river, you encountered a water spirit that conversed with you; you 
have +1 to swimming skill tests and can hold your breath for twice the usual length of time.
 
4 
You spent time with a well known ranger who passed on a great store of knowledge; you have +1 
to hunting and fishing skill tests, and pick one environment (not city) for which you gain +2 to 
your Region Lore (or if using the Survival skill gain +1 to that).
 
5 
You ‘ran’ with a street gang and picked up some useful skills - you have +1 to your Sleight of 
Hand and Sneaking skill tests but you also have an enemy; at least one powerful person knows 
about your shady past.
 
6 
You loved cooking and spent a lot of time in the kitchen; you can automatically tell if food is 
ro8en or poisoned and have 1 point in the ‘Crafting - Cooking’ skill.
3 
1 
You enjoyed taking part in plays and storytelling as a child and learned the basics of 
showmanship. You have +1 to Disguise skill tests and any social skill tests where you can tell a 
tale, or perform in front of a crowd.
 
2 
You spent many hours playing fighting games with your peers. You have 1 point in Brawling skill 
and have +1 bonus damage when using an improvised weapon.
 
3 
You were apprenticed to a craftsman - pick one type of craft, you gain one point in the skill and 
+1 to any skill tests related to it (as decided by your Director).
 
4 
You have been contacted by the spirit of one of your ancestors, and once per day may commune 
with them through quiet meditation lasting at least one hour' from 'You have been contacted by 
the spirit of one of your ancestors, and may commune with them through quiet meditation 
lasting at least one hour', needs that once per day limit in their.


--- PAGE 266 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
265
 
5 
From an early age you loved to ride and were rarely out of the saddle. You have one point in Ride
  
 
skill and Animal Lore - Horses (or another chosen steed) and have +1 to Ride skill tests.
 
6 
Your parents undertook a pilgrimage when you were a child and had you blessed at a holy site;  
you cannot be the subject of a curse and are immune to them.
4 
1 
You spent some time with a travelling circus strongman.  You have got used to supplementing 
your diet with raw eggs and meat.  You have bulging muscles and one point in the Strength 
special skill.
 
2 
You spent some time apprenticed to a hedge witch, healer or physician and have a familiarity 
with wounds and disease.  You have a point in the Healing special skill and can recognise 
common poisons and diseases without rolling.
 
3 
At your naming ceremony you were given a blessing that stays with you for life.  Once per 
adventure you can choose to automatically pass a Test for LUCK rather than roll it.  You still 
reduce your LUCK by one after the “test”.
 
4 
Your grandparent was a well known hero who was renowned for their bravery.  You have an 
almost supernatural resolve, and are unaffected by fear whether natural or magical.
 
5 
You were anointed with Oil of Eagles by an old priestess as a baby, and as a result have 
outstanding vision.  You gain +1 to all Awareness tests and can see further than most.
 
6 
Your parents sent you to one of the Temple schools for an education for a whole year.  The 
discipline was brutal, but you did gain a point in the Religion Lore special skill.
5 
1 
Your parents considered that there was no point in having children and carrying things 
themselves.  Much of your early life was spent, with your brothers and sisters, bags, boxes and 
sacks.  You have one additional encumbrance slot.
 
2 
A childhood friend was an arsonist, and to this day it shapes your fears.  You hate sleeping in a 
locked room with no easy escape, but on the other hand are able to get a flame going easily in 
almost any circumstances!
 
3 
Your childhood was spent travelling by caravan, horse or ship.  In addition to your many 
colourful memories you can also choose two more Languages which are known to level 2.
4 
A chance meeting with a sailor, a friend from childhood, led to a three day drinking binge which 
you only survived due to a strange herbal drink your friend gave you.  Since then, you are barely 
affected by alcohol.
 
5 
Some years previously, you were accidentally caught in the middle of a magical duel, and the 
after effects have left you somewhat resilient to enchantment.  You have a +1 bonus to LUCK tests 
taken to avoid magical effects.
 
6 
As a child you had an enemy, a vicious bully, who loved nothing more than inflicting bruises and 
pain on you.  As a result you became adept at hiding whenever his ugly face came into view.  You 
have +1 in the Sneaking special skill.
6 
- 
Player choice or Special


--- PAGE 267 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
266
Sworn Enemy
The world of Titan is constantly changing with many 
conflicts raging across and under its surface. Over 
time it may be that your family, clan or nation have 
ended up ba8ling with one particular foe, making 
them the sworn enemy of your people. Tales of these 
fights have been shared widely, giving you an edge 
when you encounter that particular enemy.
Against your sworn enemy, your knowledge of their 
tactics and weaknesses mean you have +1 to your 
combat rolls against them and +1 to any LUCK rolls 
you make whilst fighting them. In addition you start 
with 1 skill point in the relevant Monster Lore skill.
Table 7.4.3 Sworn Enemy. Titan is a troubled world and your people have been a=acked in the past. Who have 
you sworn vengeance against?
1d6 
 
Sworn Enemy  
Notes
1-3 
1 
Lizardmen 
 
The lizardmen of Silur Cha may prefer the hot jungles as their abode, but 
whatever you are on Titan you run the risk of being a8acked by them or 
their agents, always on the lookout for slaves or treasures.
 
2 
Undead 
 
An unfortunate aspect of life on Titan is the existence of the undead and 
their first for the life-force of the living is unending.
 
3 
Demons 
 
From the planes of hell come the demons and their mortal servants. They 
strive to come up with new ways to torment people with their cruelty.
 
4 
Elementals 
 
Whilst not always evil, creatures from the elemental planes are often 
powerful and indifferent to the damage they cause. It is best to send them 
back where they belong.
 
5 
Evil Priests 
 
The evil gods, led by Death, Disease & Decay, are always trying to cause 
ruin on Titan through their servants. You relish in hunting them down.
 
6 
Orcs & Goblins 
Made by Hashak the Creator, the orcs love to form into clans and tribes 
and live by raiding and stealing. They often bring along the cruel goblins 
to assist them. Beating back these creatures is doing everyone a favour.
4-6 
1 
Dragons 
 
Although rare there are wild places where dragon a8acks can be a brutal 
fact of life. The best policy is usually to run or hide from these powerful 
creatures, but some brave heroes are willing to take them on.
 
2 
Giants  
 
The first giants were created by Titan and some of them are still wise and 
good, but others have devolved into brutality and violence. They are 
powerful, but can be tricked.
 
3 
Creatures of Chaos 
The coming of chaos two and a half centuries ago changed the face of Titan 
leaving many places in ruins. Although the great army of chaos was 
defeated, the influence of this dangerous magic remains.
 
4 
Dark Elves 
 
A small number of elves have turned to the worship of Slangg and moved 
to live in magical underground cities. Cunning and cruel, it is a brave hero 
that takes on the Dark Elves.
 
5 
Trolls & Ogres 
The shock troops of the evil armies are the trolls and ogres. Strong but 
stupid, they can be beaten by a hero that is courageous and skilled.
 
6 
Hero’s Choice  
Pick one of the categories above or create your own, based on your hero’s 
backstory.


--- PAGE 268 ---

Chapter 7 - Political, Religious and Social Factors
267
Personality Quirk
Everybody has some element to their personality 
which marks them out as different. You can come up 
with 
something 
that 
suits 
your 
particular 
background or roll on the table below to generate 
one.
These are intended to be parts of your character, not 
dominant features. A hero that is fastidious about 
their appearance does not have to pause in combat to 
wipe the gore from their armour, but they should 
stop and bathe as soon as the opportunity presents 
itself.
Table 7.4.4 Personality Quirk
1d6 
 
Personality Quirk
1-2 
1 
Phobia: You have a distinct fear of some kind, either a particular creature or situation. Decide on 
something appropriate and make a note of it. You will go to great lengths to avoid coming into 
contact with the source of your phobia.
 
2 
You are noted for your generosity and you like to donate regularly to good causes, such as giving 
alms to the poor. The lowest in society (beggars, lepers and so on) are thankful for your kindness.
 
3 
You are fastidious about your appearance, taking pride in your grooming and your clothing.
 
4 
You hold the gods in high respect, even those opposed to you and take care not to offend them.
 
5 
You are a gourmand, you love good food and fine wine and will seek them out. What exactly 
constitutes ‘good’ food is something your hero will have to decide for themselves - a barbarian 
might insist on huge piles of roasted meat, an elf might demand fresh fruit and spring water.
 
6 
You have a great wanderlust and want to see as much of the world as you can.
3-4 
1 
You hold the gods in contempt and see their worship as a sort of weakness (you may reroll this if 
your hero is a priest or paladin, or can build it into your story).
 
2 
You are fascinated by history and ancient things, and you hope to build a collection one day.
 
3 
You are fascinated by magic, grand or trivial, and you are always on the lookout for new items to 
 
 
examine.
 
4 
You are embarrassed by displays of emotion and like to maintain a calm (some say icy) 
demeanour, particularly around strangers.
 
5 
You have a love of natural, wild animals and try to avoid hurting or killing them unless absolutely 
required.
 
6 
You are fascinated by power and those who wield it. You seek it in all its forms (force of arms, 
political, magical etc) and admire those who possess it.
5-6 
1 
You are notably short-tempered and rude to those who disappoint you. You can bite your tongue 
if required, but you resent it when you have to.
 
2 
You are honest to a fault and have trouble lying, even when telling the truth will cause problems.
 
3 
You have a vivid imagination and love to embellish and add detail and colour to your 
conversation, even if that means lying. You struggle to give a simple, straight answer even when 
it is important.
 
4 
You have an insatiable curiosity about the world and find it incredibly frustrating when you can’t 
get an answer or explanation for something.
 
5 
You love games and competitions and are always looking for ways to keep a ‘score’ of what’s 
happening. You particularly dislike losing.
 
6 
You are particularly merciful and believe in giving your enemies the chance for redemption if 
possible (this does not apply to creatures such as undead, demons, elementals and so as they 
operate according to an alien morality).


--- PAGE 269 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
268
Summary
The most important thing is that you are happy with 
your hero and the details of their background and 
appearance. There is very li8le point in forcing 
yourself to play a character which does not suit you or 
is at odds with what you imagine your hero to be. If 
that happens, you should change the parts that are 
bothering you and roll or choose something that is 
more appropriate - the aim is to end up with a hero 
that is interesting and exciting to you, a hero that you 
want to see explore the world of Titan.


--- PAGE 270 ---

Chapter 8 - Rumours and Events
269
8 - RUMOURS AND EVENTS
Whilst you are merrily adventuring across Titan, the 
rest of the world is still in motion and things are 
happening that can help or hinder your progress. 
These come to you as rumours or events. They may 
simply be gossip or they might completely alter your 
plans! Including these influences in your game is 
optional; the other systems will work without them, 
but they do add an unpredictable element to your 
game which will enhance the feeling of immersion in 
a living world.
You should roll on the Rumours & Events table once 
when you start your adventures and thereafter roll 
either every 5d6 days or, if you are taking a more 
relaxed a8itude to timekeeping, each time you take 
on a new opponent (major villain), or start a major 
new chapter of your campaign. You receive the 
information in the form of gossip and the work of 
town criers - if you are out in the wilderness or a 
dungeon, you should still roll and apply the effects. 
The effects last until you roll again or at least one 
month has passed, however you are reckoning time. 
You can also receive new rumours by interacting with 
some of the people of your world, as described in the 
encounters.
Whilst all these rumours & events are reported to the 
heroes as being truthful, it’s up to you to decide if 
they are real or imagined. News of a distant war 
might be based on actual events, or it might be a 
rumour that has go8en out of hand. Either way the 
effects are real.
Having established the broad category for our news, 
we can find more details by making a roll on one of 
the following tables. You can, of course, simply use 
the theme to come up with your own rumours and 
events based on what you think is appropriate for 
your campaign.
Table 8.1 Rumours & Events
1d6  
Domain 
 
Description
1 
Winds of Magic 
A significant use, or misuse of magic has widespread effects.
2 
Fury of the Gods 
The priests and their followers are causing some form of trouble.
3 
Chaos Unleashed 
The clash of steel on steel rings across the land.
4 
Lust for Power 
Merchants, thieves and nobles conducting deadly intrigues.
5 
Natural World 
Floods, tornadoes, earthquakes - nature is dangerous!
6 
Trivia & Gossip 
Everyday trivia - gossip and rumours spread like wildfire.


--- PAGE 271 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
270
Winds of Magic Rumours & Events
Whilst magic is ever present on Titan the sages and 
practitioners will tell you that it swirls and gusts 
around them, sometimes thundering like a storm and 
at other times flowing by with barely a whisper. 
Naturally, this has an effect on spell casters, 
invigorating them with unexpected energies when 
the winds blow strongly and making life difficult 
when the gusts are weak and hard to gather. Much 
like sailors and the trade winds, spell casters respond 
to these changes with bursts of activity.
Table 8.2 Winds of Magic Rumours & Events
2d6 
Rumour or Event
2 
The winds of magic are subdued and weak, making it difficult to summon the energy to cast spells. 
Effect: all spellcasting has a -1 penalty to the roll.
3 
Wizards have been called  together to discuss a disruption to the flow of magic across the world. No one 
knows what this means, though most suspect an uprising of Chaos from Khul, but it is certainly bad 
news. 
Effect: Rolling a total of 11 for a spellcasting a8empt will also result in a roll on the Oops! Spellcasting 
failure table.
4 
A trove of ancient magics, leftover from the Age of Wizards, was recently uncovered and its treasures are 
being circulated widely, flooding the market with an influx of goods. 
Effect: The cost of scrolls is halved.
5 
Sorcerers have been called to a great tournament of magic. 
Effect: The cost of Sorcery spell components is doubled.
6 
A coven of witches has been unmasked, but they sca8ered before they could all be captured - they could 
be anywhere: 
Effect: If you are in a se8lement where you could encounter the Witchsniffer, you must take that as the 
first of your encounters for the day, but only once.
7 
For reasons unclear to you, the flows of magic are favouring one aspect of your craft. 
Effect: Pick one of your spells for which you gain +2 to spellcasting rolls whilst this event lasts.
8 
A crafty wizard has discovered a way to locate and teleport magic items at a distance. 
Effect: Next time you roll a treasure that is a magic item, ignore it - it has already been taken!
9 
Wizards or Sorcerers have been seen duelling across the mountaintops, flinging lightning bolts and 
thunder from  peak to peak in an awesome display of power: 
Effect: Characters with spellcasting ability gain +1 to any Con skill tests as people tremble in fear of their 
 
magic.
10 
Not one moon past, people saw strange lights in the sky, streaking about like a flock of fiery birds. One   
old lady was so affrighted by it she dropped dead on the spot and the next day all the cows' milk spoiled. 
Effect: Using magic in a se8lement unse8les the locals - after casting a spell you have -2 to Etique8e, 
Bargain and Leadership skill tests but +2 to Con skill tests.
11 
For any spellcasters, strange and intricate dreams visit you across a span of several nights, offering you  
an insight to your chosen craft. 
Effect: The next time you spend experience points to learn a spell, the cost for one spell is halved.
12 
The winds of magic blow strong and true, filling adepts with power. 
Effect: All spellcasting rolls have a +1 bonus.


--- PAGE 272 ---

Chapter 8 - Rumours and Events
271
Fury of the Gods Rumours & Events
The gods of Titan, be they good, neutral or evil, are 
not distant or forgo8en but actively involved in the 
world. They may not be able (or willing) to manifest 
themselves on the mortal plane but instead work 
through their worshippers and priests to further their 
aims in a constantly shifting ba8le of wills.
Table 8.3 Fury of the Gods Rumours & Events
2d6 
Rumour or Event
2 
A necromancer, a priest of Death, has been raising the dead. 
Effect: Each time you fight a monster, roll 2d6 - on the result of a 2 or 3, you are also a8acked by a Ghoul 
that lurches from the shadows (see the Ghoul encounter C8)
3 
Followers of Slangg, the god of Malice, have slain a well loved hero and all who hear the news mourn her 
passing. 
Effect: Lose one point of LUCK.
4 
Chaos Magic dances in the air and evil creatures welcome its touch. When fighting evil humanoids and 
beasts (your decision to decide what counts as evil) it will have a mutation. Roll 1d6 - 1: Barbed Tentacle 
- it gains an extra a8ack which counts as a small claw, 2-3: Scales - thick scales grant it +1 to its Armour 
roll, 4-5: Rippling Muscles grant it +1 to damage rolls, 6: Chaos has ravaged this creature reducing it’s Skill 
and Stamina by one point each.
5 
Religious conflict has escalated and tensions between followers are high. The priests are nervous and wary 
towards strangers. 
Effect: You can only obtain services at a Temple if you follow gods of the same type (good, neutral, evil), 
otherwise you are turned away.
6 
Sukh, God of Storms, Pangara, God of Winds and Farigiss, God of Ice and Cold have been holding a 
contest to see who is the most powerful. 
Effect: When you roll for weather add +1 and Exposure rolls have a -3 penalty as the weather goes crazy.
7 
Fulkra & Solinthar, the gods of Travellers and Mariners, have been looking after their charges well and the 
trade caravans have mostly got to their destinations unharmed. 
Effect: Bargain rolls have a +1 bonus.
8 
Verlang, God of Metal Workers, has been visiting the dreams of blacksmiths to help them with their work. 
Effect: Armour and Weapons are on sale at half normal price.
9 
Fourga, God of Pride and Telak, God of Courage and Combat are rewarding the courage of heroes with 
minor boons. 
Effect: After you win a combat, gain +1 to your combat rolls for the next combat (can only gain this once 
each day).
10 
A group of druids have been celebrating the ascension of a new Archdruid to lead them. 
Effect: Herbs are in great supply and the price of salves and ointments is halved.
11 
A holy man appeared and performed a great miracle at the temple, curing the sick and ailing. The gods 
have favoured us and many offerings were made in thanks bringing great fortune to the pious. 
Effect: Visiting a temple and making a donation of 5g pieces will restore one point of LUCK (this can only 
be done once).
12 
A great stag has been sighted, with a skin of white and gold! All are taking this as a sign that the gods are 
pleased with the mortals. 
Effect: You may restore one point of LUCK.


--- PAGE 273 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
272
Chaos Unleashed Rumours & Events
Chaos, in this context, means not just creatures 
tainted by chaotic magic but the chaos of ba8le and 
war, where armies clash and blood is spilt. Such 
things are unfortunately very common on Titan and 
the effects can stretch well beyond the ba8lefield.
Table 8.4 Chaos Unleashed Rumours & Events
2d6 
Rumour or Event
2 
The armies of your kingdom have suffered a terrible reverse, with many lives lost and an invading force 
pillageing and burning. People are fleeing and many are saying that all will be killed or taken as slaves. 
Effect: This news casts a dark shadow over all who hear it - lose one point of LUCK as your spirit withers.
3 
Pirates have been very active of late, raiding and sinking ships. 
Effect: Merchants are short of stock and worried - Bargain skill rolls have a -2 penalty. If you are in the 
wilderness the cost of transport by boat is doubled.
4 
.A powerful noble has been corrupted and is now plo8ing treachery across the realm. He has been hiring 
mercs to go out under cover of darkness and cause destruction. Beware night, for it is full of terrors. 
Effect: If you roll for an encounter at night, roll twice and take the ‘worse’ result - the one that is more 
likely to lead to a fight.
5 
The dwarves are preparing for an a8ack by a great goblin army and are returning to their strongholds. 
Effect: Any social skill rolls with Dwarves are at -2 unless you are a Dwarf; they are surly and taciturn as 
they worry about home affairs.
6 
The army is short-handed but the King is refusing to pay more in wages - as a result the recruiters are 
trying some different tactics to fill up the regiments. 
Effect: If you are in a se8lement and move around at night your first encounter will be with Slave Takers 
(C23). This happens once per se8lement.
7 
The army has returned from campaigning and the soldiers are taking their ease while they can, which 
involves a lot of drinking.. 
Effect: Price of alcohol is doubled and if you visit a Drinking Den or Inn roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 you have  
the ‘Mass Brawl’ encounter (C12).
8 
A great lord has decided to raise a warband to raid a neighbouring kingdom and he is holding contests 
to find the best archers and fighters to accompany him. 
Effect: The next time you are in a se8lement you may choose to a8end either the Archery Contest (C5) or 
the Wrestling Contest (C15) when at the Marketplace location.
9 
Barbarian Chiefs have announced a gladiatorial contest and vicious warriors from all across the land are 
flocking to join in. 
Effect: In the wilderness any encounter with a Band of Pilgrims (W5) will be a Band of Barbarians. In a 
se8lement the Rowdy Barbarian (S22) will always lead to a fight.
10 
Bandits have been a8acking nearby villages and a lord is raising a militia to deal with the problem. 
Effect: The price of weapons and armour is doubled (both selling and buying).
11 
The army won a great victory over an orc and goblin warband! In celebration, feasts have been prepared 
for the returning troops and a terrible danger has been averted. 
Effect: Everyone is in a good mood and all Social skill rolls receive a +1 bonus whilst the celebrations last.
12 
A swarm of chaos creatures had crawled forth from the darkest pits of the earth, summoned by a foul 
knight of chaos, but it was swiftly and soundly defeated by a band of heroes; consequently, all heroes are 
being held in high regard at the moment. 
Effect: Restore one point of LUCK.


--- PAGE 274 ---

Chapter 8 - Rumours and Events
273
Lust for Power Rumours & Events
There are many men and women who seek power or 
wealth (and what is the difference between those two 
anyway?) and the ones who let their ambitions 
consume them are more than willing to cheat, lie or 
bully their way to the top. Often, this has 
consequences for anyway unfortunate enough to be 
in their way.
Table 8.5 Lust for Power - Rumours & Events
2d6 
Rumour or Event
2 
A run in with Lizardmen cost the lives of many pirates; their captains are looking to replace the lost crew. 
If you go drinking in the poorer parts of town, be careful you don’t wake up clapped in irons and 
learning to row! 
Effect: In se8lements, the atmosphere in the Slum Alleys and Drinking Dens is bad and all social skill rolls 
have to be made with a -2 penalty. If you are in the wilderness, your first encounter in a Shorelines & Sea 
area will be with Slave Takers (C23).
3 
A murderer stalks the streets! Several people have been taken and when their bodies have turned up, 
they are horribly mutilated! 
Effect: A curfew has been imposed. If you move around a se8lement at night, ignore any ‘friendly’ 
encounters other than Night Watchman (S35) as everyone is inside!
4 
The tax collectors were returning to the treasury with their coffers full, when they were robbed by a gang 
of bandits and sent packing with only their underclothes. The nobles are furious, but the slums are full 
of people with sudden unexplained wealth. 
Effect: If you meet a Patrol (W16) in the wilderness, instead of the usual options they will demand 2d6gp 
from you. In a se8lement, If you meet a Tithe Collector (S36), you will be charged double the usual 
amount! On the positive side, if you visit a Drinking Den, you may drink for free, as a merry stranger 
pays the bill for the whole bar!
5 
Several of the nobles have fallen ill with a strange disease, believed to have been passed around at a wild 
party which the priests did not approve of. Large donations have been made to several temples in 
recompense and the priests are busy tending to the sickly nobility instead of the ailing poor.
Effect: The cost of services at a Temple are doubled. If you have a disease when you meet anyone 
described as a noble, they will cover their faces and flee.
6 
A number of con-men are plying their trade and the ‘sport’ of relieving people of their gold through lies 
and deceptions has become strangely popular. 
Effect: On your first ‘friendly’ encounter of the day roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 you should replace the 
encounter with the Con Artist (S45) and you must take the ‘contest of wits’ option.
7 
Complaints from the peasants have convinced the nobles to carry out a law & order crackdown. 
Effect: Rolls on the Lawbreaker table are made at a -3 penalty, but if you ‘call for the watch’ you ignore 
the usual penalty to your Leadership skill test.
8 
The King is angry with his wife, for he believes she has taken one of his Counts as a lover. She has been 
exiled to one his castles, where she is miserable and plots against the King sending out spies and 
charlatans to stir up the people. 
Effect: If you encounter any nobles, they will ignore you out of suspicion that you might be a spy unless 
you make an Etique8e skill roll with a -3 penalty to convince them otherwise.


--- PAGE 275 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
274
2d6 
Rumour or Event
9 
Two thieves guilds are fighting each other in a secret war, se8ing up traps and ambushes for each other. 
Effect: Forewarned by this news you are looking out for traps and gain a +1 bonus on to your Trap 
Knowledge skill rolls.
10 
A royal baby is on the way! The queen is pregnant and the mood at court is full of joy. 
Effect: All Bargain skill rolls gain a +1 bonus due to the general good mood of merchants that know a royal 
birth means a celebration, and a chance for profit, is soon at hand.
11 
The wealthiest merchants are appalled at the state of the city. They have decided to invest their wealth in 
making improvements and are threatening to demolish the slums and replace them with new houses. 
Effect: In the Slum Alleys location, 
everyone is on edge and your 
Etique8e and Bargain rolls are at -
1 there.
12 
A Lord, aided by a group of 
heroes, has been unmasked as a 
foul 
cultist 
who 
was 
using 
demonic powers to advance his 
cause and gain power. There is 
great shock but also relief that he 
was stopped in time. Effect: Heroes 
are held in high regard - Restore 
one point of LUCK.
The Natural World Rumours & Events
Most of Titan is still an untamed wilderness, full of 
savage beasts and powerful natural phenomena 
which can spread their effects far and wild. Travellers 
and merchants bring news of these events to the 
cities, though how much of it is true is a ma8er of 
much bar-room debate.
Table 8.6 Natural World - Rumours & Events
2d6 
Rumour or Event
2 
Infested - whether its poor sanitation or something more sinister is a mystery, but a great plague of huge 
rats is sweeping across the land. Giant Rats. 
Effect: On any encounter, roll 2d6 and on the result of a 2 or 3, you are a8acked by a Giant Rat (encounter 
C9) which you must fight alongside anything else you face.
3 
An earthquake has struck, turning buildings into rubble and opening great rents in the earth, as if a great 
clawed hand had struck the ground and ripped deep into it. 
Effect: You must test your SKILL or suffer 1d6 points of damage from falling debris. If you are in town, 
food and accommodation prices double for one week as people clear up. If you are in the wilderness, 
your next two encounters will be a Crevasse (W2). In a dungeon you hear a rumbling but li8le else.


--- PAGE 276 ---

Chapter 8 - Rumours and Events
275
2d6 
Rumour or Event
4 
Hard rains have fallen in the last few weeks, very much out of season. There have been floods, fallen trees 
and paths have been made impassable as they are washed out or turned into a quagmire. If you are 
travelling in the wilderness, Marshlands are impassable for 2d6 days and Rivers & Lakes have double the 
usual travel time. 
Effect:  Merchants are struggling to obtain goods - all Bargain rolls have a -2 penalty.
5 
A bountiful new source of gold has been found and miners are rushing to exploit it. 
Effect: Pick one of  the Hills or Mountains areas on your map - in that area, replace any ‘monster’ 
encounter with either Prospectors (W31) or Abandoned Campsite (W28).
6 
A great livestock plague has swept across the land, killing many beasts. 
Effect: The price of animals (horses, ponies, pigs etc) is doubled and if you should have encounter W9   
 
Herd of Beasts you will instead encounter nothing but a series of ro8ing corpses.
7 
A mysterious dungeon has been discovered. 
Effect: Pick an area on your map that is within 30 - 50 miles of your current location (3 to 5 squares or 
hexes away) and note that it now contains a dungeon. If you visit that area you can make a Region Lore 
 
roll to find the entrance and explore it, using the normal rules for Dungeon Creation (Chapter 5).
8 
For unknown reasons, foul creatures have been ski8ering and crawling out of the woods and seeking 
shelter wherever they can find it. 
Effect: The next time you have an encounter that involves fighting a monster of some kind, replace 
whatever you roll on the table with a Giant Spider, C20 (this only happens once).
9 
Starving - the last harvest failed and people are desperately short of food. All Food costs three times the 
usual amount. 
Effect: In any encounter you can offer up one day's rations to gain a bonus of +1 on any test of your Social 
skill tests.
10 
An expedition into the Ice Wastes has returned bringing a   
great bounty of furs and leathers with them.   Artisans have 
been hard and work turning them into armour, harnesses 
and other such items. 
Effect: Leather items (including armour) and winter clothing 
are available at half price. 
11 
Bountiful - the recent harvests have been exceptional and 
food and drink is in great supply and of excellent quality. 
Effect: All food and drink costs are halved and your first meal 
of the day now restores an additional point of STAMINA.
12 
A strange comet has been sighted in the night sky, opinions 
about its meaning vary widely, but in general it seems to be 
a harbinger of good fortune. 
Effect: If you test your LUCK you have a +1 bonus to the roll.


--- PAGE 277 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
276
Trivia & Gossip Rumours & Events
No ma8er what great events happen in the rest of the 
world the lives of the simple folk, the farmers and 
crafters, go on regardless. Perhaps even a mighty 
hero such as yourself might learn something 
interesting by listening to those that toil.
Table 8.7 Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & Events
2d6 
Rumour or Event
2 
There has been a terrible blight on the land, it's been awful for the farmers. 
The cabbages have been wiped out completely and they are ten times normal at market! 
Effect: Cabbages cost ten times as much as usual
3 
Looks like the weather is about to change. If I were you, I’d hurry up and get where you are going, before 
the rains come. Mind you, last time I thought that it was sunny for a month! Want to buy some eggs? 
Effect: You may purchase up to 2d6 meals worth of eggs at 1gp/meal.
4 
You aren’t from around here, are you? I’ll give you some advice, want it or not. Stay away from the forest. 
Nothing good ever came out of it and those hunters that go in there don’t come out the same. Always 
looking around, shifty like. Take my word from it and go the other way, if you have any sense. 
Effect: If you enter a Forest area, roll 2x on the encounters table and take the ‘most dangerous’ encounter.
5 
I don’t know why you're looking at me, I’ve got to get these sheep up to the top field so I have and I don’t 
have the time to parley with some ragged traveller. I’ll wish you all the best, but I’ll be on my way. Effect:
If you visit the top field, there are sheep. They ignore you.
6 
Well I heard he did it, but my old nan down the road says otherwise, so now I don’t know what to think. 
Maybe he did, maybe not, who am I to judge anyway. Don’t tell anyone I told you, eh? 
Effect: Mild confusion.
7 
It was the middle of last night and everyone in our road woke up all at once! I can’t tell you why, but I 
reckon it was some sort of witchcraft, so I’m telling you now it’s best if you stay indoors and don’t go out 
after dark. Who knows what’s lurking about? 
Effect: It was a bad batch of beer, not witchcraft, so there is no effect.
8 
A craze has swept the land in which peasants compete to see who can create the most ornate hat, and 
wherever you travel you find people holding hat contests and taking the art of millinery very seriously. 
Effect: Adventures often come across strange objects in their travels such as the fur of some monster or a 
goblins necklace - you may sell a pocketful of such curios for 3d6gp in any city or town.
9 
They say that a dark stranger rode through under a blood moon and that after he left all the black cats 
had disappeared. Some days later a shepherd was found torn to pieces but guess what? None of his 
sheep were harmed at all, though all their wool turned purple. 
Effect: In the wilderness people are happy to meet a normal person, you have +1 to your Etique8e rolls.
10 
You can’t go around looking like that, people will laugh. The current trends in clothing have changed 
suddenly, taking everybody by surprise - it’s time to update your look if you want to be taken seriously. 
Effect: Price of clothing is doubled.
11 
A great crafters fair has been announced and in preparation artisans and makers have been busy in their 
workshops, practising and trying to create their finest work. The markets are humming with activity.   
Effect: All Bargain skill rolls have a +1 bonus as traders compete to sell the produce of the workshops.
12 
‘Come, come and join the feast!’ A celebration is in progress, marking an important turning point in the 
 
seasons of the year. Food and drink have been prepared and feelings of joy and optimism run high. 
Effect: You restore one point of LUCK.


--- PAGE 278 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
277
9 - VILLAINS
What would a hero be without a villain to defeat? In 
this chapter we present a number of archetypes of 
villainy to use, which we will call your opponent. In 
general it is assumed you have one opponent at a 
time, though you can take on more if you are up to 
the challenge!
An important thing to note is that your opponent will 
not, initially, be aware of you (unless you want that to 
be part of your campaign) and will try to escape from 
fighting you - it will be up to you to force them into a 
confrontation where you can defeat them.
In addition to the example villains we also offer a 
means to randomly generate your own dastardly 
evildoers. Looking through the list of opponents will 
give you some ideas of how to set up and use 
randomly generated antagonists. Feel free to add 
your own twists and tricks to the villains repertoire 
and as always to alter them in whatever way you see 
fit.
9.1 Example Villains
Twelve example villains are given here, which should 
provide a good range of opponents to occupy your 
heroes. There are three for each of the domains 
‘Winds of Magic’, ‘Fury of the Gods’, ‘Chaos 
Unleashed’ and ‘Lust for Power’. These domains 
correspond both to the common fantasy tropes 
(magic users, worshippers of evil gods, warriors and 
‘professionals’) and to the division of special skills in 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy. This affects what your 
opponent will do - an evil priest is more likely to 
concern themselves with gathering cultists to their 
cause than trying to start fights between criminal 
gangs.
For each villain there is provided:
Description - a pen portrait of the mastermind or 
group the brave Hero must defeat. Their methods 
and motives are varied, but all of them wish ill 
upon the world and are willing to pursue their 
own goals regardless of the consequences for the 
common folk, be they human, elf or dwarf.
Motivation - a brief summary of their motivations 
and a table showing which type of missions they 
usually instigate.
Lair - when you finally track them down, this 
gives you a scene for your ba8le but usually has no 
wider impact on gameplay.
Confrontation - each opponent will have their 
own tactics and abilities, which you should read 
carefully before beginning the fight. It is highly 
likely that you will need to track down your 
opponent more than once before defeating them. 
After all, a villain has their own plans which don’t 
involve being defeated by an annoying hero!
Item - each villain also has a unique magic item. 
Make sure you know what they do before you 
fight them.
Henchmen - The most loyal servants of your 
opponent, always keen to do their bidding. 
Sometimes you might end up ba8ling your 
opponent's 
henchman, 
rather 
than 
the 
mastermind.
Retaliation - after you completed your first 
mission (even if you don’t manage to strike at your 
opponent), your opponent will understand that 
some Hero is trying to foil them - this has 
consequences! The retaliation continues until your 
opponent has been defeated. Depending on the 
villain, this can be very inconvenient.


--- PAGE 279 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
278
Choosing a Villain
Whilst you can create quests and adventures without 
a specific villain to oppose you it can be more 
compelling to have an opponent to pit your wits 
against. You can either choose one from the examples 
provided, create your own (see section 9.2 for some 
help with doing this) or roll randomly. 
Table 9.1.1 Who is your Opponent?
Roll 1d6, Reroll 5, 6
 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
3 
 
 
4
Roll 1d6 
Winds of Magic 
Fury of the Gods 
Chaos Unleashed 
Lust for Power
The winds of magic  
The Gods look upon 
The mighty ba3le  
What is life, if not a 
swirl and thunder  
the mortal plane and 
drums sound out  
competition?  And how else 
around Titan;   
grow restless, eager  
their rhythm and the 
should we measure winners
anyone who could  
to play some part 
dungeons of Titan  
and losers, but by the
seize their power  
in the drama. 
 
spew out their foul 
accumulation of power?
would be mighty  
becoming their   
denizens to unleash 
indeed.  
 
favourite will bring  
havoc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
great rewards. 
1-2 
 
The Magician  
The Inquisitor  
The Horde 
 
The Syndicate
3-4 
 
The Sorcerer  
The Claws & Thorns The Emerald Scale 
The Warlord
5-6 
 
The Coven 
 
The Necromancer 
The Nest Mother 
The House of Swords
For each villain you will see in their description a 
table describing what sort of adventures are 
particularly relevant to them. You can use this in 
combination with the campaign missions described 
in section 10.1 to discover a series of adventures 
which should culminate in you defeating your 
opponent. When you have defeated one, you can roll 
to see who you are facing next and carry on with your 
hero’s story.
You can also use their descriptions and motivations to 
come up with quests and missions of your own, 
section 10.2 has extensive advice on how you can do 
that. The important thing to remember is that the 
villains are not, initially, out to a8ack you. They have 
plans of their own and you are taking on the task of 
stopping them, so your missions should reflect that 
dynamic. Of course, once you have thwarted them a 
few times they might decide to go after you directly 
and that can be an adventure in itself, but it is 
probably not going to be the first thing that happens 
unless you can come up with a good reason as to why 
they already hate you!


--- PAGE 280 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
279


--- PAGE 281 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
280
The Magician - Taz Remak
Description: Whilst most magicians follow after the 
example of the Keeper of the Darkwood, Yaztromo, 
and fight against evil and chaos there are always 
those that seek greater power with li8le regard for the 
lives of the common people. Those magicians may 
appear to be gentle scholars but they have no 
problem in using the orcs, goblins and others as 
agents in their pursuit of knowledge.
Deep in the night, his table lit by enchanted glow-
orbs, the man sifted through his parchments once 
again. Somewhere in these documents were the clues 
that would, with careful deciphering, let him uncover 
the lost and forgo8en artifacts he craved. He moved 
his hands slowly across the jumble of papers like a 
scorpion approaching its prey. His fingers touched 
the spine of an ancient book with a fire charred cover 
and he pulled it open and started to work through the 
pages that he already knew by heart. The knowledge 
he sought was surely here, somewhere, if only he 
could put the pieces together. 
After more fruitless hours of searching, Taz Remak 
looked up from his collection and out of the narrow 
window of his study. Dawn was breaking across the 
city and the sounds of everyday life starting to rise to 
their usual susurration. Taz stood and walked across 
to the window to be8er take in the view and give his 
limbs a moment to stretch. The dawn light painted 
his face in gold - he was a handsome looking older 
man, with plenty of grey in his hair and beard, and a 
sharp prow of a nose between his deep set eyes. At 
first sight he might be mistaken for a merchant, but 
meet his gaze too long and you would be struck by 
the coldness of his regard as if he were a hawk 
moments before it swooped on its prey.
The magician watched a peasant struggling to pull 
her cart of vegetables along a muddy track, heading 
for the marketplace. His pursuit of ancient 
knowledge was dangerous and his schemes might 
result in the deaths of many people like her - but what 
did it ma8er? Did the farmer give up just because 
lambs had to die to fill the pot? Thinking of this 
reminded Taz that he hadn’t eaten in a day or so and 
that even a powerful wizard couldn’t sustain himself 
on magic alone. It was time to take a break from his 
studies and make plans. The city was full of mysteries 
and he would be the one to unravel them.
Motivation: Taz Remak is obsessed with finding 
ancient artefacts and lore to increase his magical 
knowledge and power.
The Magician Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-4 
The power of magic is there for the taking, but only the wisest know  
Winds of Magic
how. Years of research and practice are needed to achieve greatness, 
now is the time to put that knowledge to use.
5 
Magic is above even the greatest king, but even dull minds have their  
Lust for Power
uses. A bit of gold or fla8ery works as well as any spell and it is the ends, 
not the means, which ma8er.
6 
Crude tools give crude results. Stooping to such devices is regre8able,  
Chaos Unleashed
but practising one's control over the lesser minds? That is knowledge 
worth pursuing.


--- PAGE 282 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
281
Lair:
City: The magician is careful not to lead anyone back 
to his true sanctum, but instead has set up a 
temporary base from which to conduct his 
operations. This is a large tent, split into two rooms (a 
bedroom and a simple study). The tent is made of 
coloured cloth with mystical runes highlighted in 
gold and silver. If the magician flees from combat or 
is defeated, the tent and its contents will disappear 
with a loud puffing noise and a large cloud of dust.
Dungeon: Taz Remak is not a natural dungeon 
denizen, so one room will have been cleaned up and 
fi8ed with a heavy oak door. Inside the room, 
glowing 
orbs 
illuminate 
a 
desk 
covered 
in 
parchments filled with his increasingly deranged 
scrawls. To one side a simple cot provides a place to 
sleep - this is not a room that Taz wishes to spend 
much time in.
Wilderness: The large tent used as a temporary base in 
the city has been brought out here by his servants (all 
cowards who will not fight) and erected in the wilds. 
Using his magic, Taz has erected an earthen wall 
around it to offer some protection.
Confrontation
Taz Remak 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
12 
MAGIC  
5 (Arcane Power 8, MP 30) 
Armour:  
None (Dodge skill 3) 
Weapon:  
Staff.
Dressed in fine robes and wielding a carved oaken 
staff, Taz Remak fights with magic. He will use the 
spells ‘Flash!’ on the first round after which he will 
use ‘Fire Bolt’ to whi8le down the hero.
Taz Remak doesn’t like fighting, particularly those 
times he is hurt. If Taz is damaged he will teleport 
away to another location..unless you can taunt him to 
stay. Once he is hit, make a test against your Con 
special skill. If you succeed he will stay but if you fail 
he disappears in a puff of smoke at the start of the 
next round and you must track him down again. Each 
time you confront him, he grows angrier with you 
and will stay for one more round before he considers 
teleporting away (so 2 rounds the second time you 
confront, 3 rounds the third and so on).  Great is the 
pride of wizards….and still greater their fall!
Item: Scarf of Many Colours. Taz likes to go about 
town without being noticed and has acquired this 
scarf, which can subtly alter the appearance of its 
wearer granting them +1 to Disguise skill tests.
Henchmen
Apprentice 
SKILL   
4 
STAMINA  
8 
MAGIC  
3 (Arcane Power 5, MP 14) 
Weapon:  
Staff 
Armour:  
None (Dodge skill 2)
Taz has recruited a number of apprentices to help him 
- they are desperate to impress the older magician in 
the hope of being taught greater magics. When 
confronted they will fight using the spells ‘Weakness’ 
on the first round and then ‘Flash!’ after which they 
will use their staves. They are ultimately cowards - if 
reduced to STAMINA of 2 or less they will surrender. 
In tears. It’s up to you what you do about that.
Retaliation
Once riled, the magician will a8empt to destroy his 
enemies from afar, scrying out their location and 
sending a magically animated club to bash them. This 
scrying is time consuming and Taz Remak cannot 
afford the time to do it each day - roll 1d6. On a 1,2 or 
3 he has found you and sent an animated club to your 
location (roll another 1d6 to see when this happens - 
1-2: morning, 3-4: midday, 5-6: evening). The club has 
SKILL 8 but as per the ‘Animate’ spell, if it loses a 
round of combat (i.e you manage to damage it) the 
spell ends. It does damage as a normal, non-magical 
club.


--- PAGE 283 ---

The Sorcerer Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-2 
Only I, the sorcerer, am capable of harnessing the power of magic to its  
Winds of Magic
full extent. Let others tremble at my mastery of the arcane!
3-4 
It is only natural that people flock to do my bidding. Very well, I shall  
Lust for Power
find tasks that suit their meagre talents.
5-6 
Perhaps one day I shall grow strong enough to challenge them, but for  
Fury of the Gods
now even I must bow to the gods and make use of their blessings.
AFF Adventure Creation System
282
The Sorcerer, Zeoltan the Immolator
Description: Sorcerers are the most unpredictable of 
spell casters, since much of their power derives from 
some innate quality. They do not have to endure the 
drudgery of lessons in the temple or seek out the 
favour of a learned master. As a result, they often 
develop their own explanation for why they have 
been 
granted 
abilities 
that 
can 
cause 
such 
devastation; a common reason being that they have 
been chosen to rise above the common folk! As you 
can imagine this leads to a lot of problems which is 
why sorcerers are generally treated with even more 
distrust and suspicion than magicians.
To the raiders she must have looked an easy mark. A 
lone woman, well dressed and unarmoured, riding a 
good horse down a bad road. They would already 
have been thinking of ways to spend their pickings as 
they charged through the trees towards her. Then she 
stopped her horse and quite calmly looked at them. 
Her expression changed from the tired boredom of a 
long ride into the malicious glee of a bad tempered 
child that had found something small and weak to 
use as a plaything. Her eyes blazed with a sudden 
fire. Probably the smartest bandits realised at this 
point they had miscalculated but it was too late. With 
a graceful flick of her wrists gouts of glowing flame 
leapt, dancing, from her palms and then around the 
tree trunks and onto each man turning them into 
spinning, tumbling fire sprites. The men's war cries 
turned to screams as they burned, beating futilely at 
the flames that refused to be extinguished.
Within moments it was all over. The bandits were 
silent smoking corpses sca8ered near the edge of the 
road and the Lady Zeoltan Geara, known to her 
followers as Zeoltan the Immolator, pa8ed her horse 
a few times to calm it and then continued on her 
journey. It had been a pleasant diversion to unleash 
her power so freely but now she was tired from the 
exertion and wanted to get to the comforts of a good 
bed in the city, where so many opportunities awaited 
her.
Motivation: Zeoltan is motivated by fierce pride in 
her powers and the joy of using them. She wants to 
use her magic to cause destruction and dominate 
others.


--- PAGE 284 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
283
Lair
City: The Sorcerer is proud but not foolish. She has 
obtained a rented room of some style and quality 
from which to carry out her plots. This is a pleasantly 
furnished room, light and airy - the sort of place 
where it would be nice to spend an afternoon taking 
tea and discussing books, for Zeoltan is keen to 
maintain the pretence of being just another young 
noblewoman.
Dungeon: Zeoltan is confident of her ability to 
protect herself, so her lair in the dungeon will lack 
much beyond the basics. She is here to do something 
important, not impress visitors. Apart from a cot and 
a fireplace, her room will only be distinctive only 
because it is kept cleaner and warmer than the rest.
Wilderness: Sorcerers pride themselves on being self-
sufficient. In the wilderness, Zeoltan will have found 
a hut or farmhouse and taken it for herself, killing the 
former inhabitants if necessary. The building will 
have been brought to a livable state, if it was in 
disrepair, but the only unusual thing about it will be 
the woodpile is very well stocked - she likes to keep 
the fire going day and night.
Confrontation
Zeoltan the Immolator 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
14 
MAGIC  
5 Inner Power 8 
Armour:  
None (Dodge skill 3) 
Weapon:  
Dagger
Although Lady Zeoltan Geara carries a dagger, her 
pride means she will always a8empt to use magic to 
defend herself. Her spells are ‘SIX’ which she will use 
when the fight starts and ‘HOT’ which she will use 
until she runs out of the STAMINA to cast it. Zeoltan 
herself is immune to damage from her own fiery 
spells and has no concerns about turning her lair into 
an inferno.
Zeoltan doesn’t like being disturbed. The first time 
she is injured she will snap her fingers teleporting 
you across the city! (in a dungeon you are transported 
to a room in another section and in the wilderness 
you are transported to an adjacent area). Drop a dice 
onto the map to find out where you pop back into 
existence. By the time you have returned, Zeoltan is 
gone. However, this sort of magic is too taxing to be 
done more than once a week - so find her again soon! 
Provided you find her in the next week she will not be 
able to dismiss you and will fight to the death.
Item: Pendant of Obsidian. Wary of fighting other 
magic users, Zeoltan wears a necklace holding a 
shard of obsidian. Once each day it can absorb one 
lightning based magical a8ack against its wearer.
Henchman
Bedazzled Noble 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
Sword
The Lady has charmed and awed a number of minor 
nobles from failing houses to act as her agents. They 
are so bedazzled that they will fight to the death to 
save her. It is notable that she has not recruited other 
users of magic - she wants no rivals! Whilst fighting 
these fools will continue to remind you of how poor 
and unworthy you are compared to their mistress.
Retaliation
Zeoltan doesn’t want any scruffy heroes stopping 
her. Once engaged in fighting her, she will perform a 
ritual to call upon the powers of fire and vengeance. 
Everytime you are in combat (not just with her but 
with anyone), you must roll 1d6 each round - on a roll 
of 1, some part of your clothing or your weapon will 
flare into sudden scorching flame! This does not 
damage the item but does cause 1d3 points of 
STAMINA damage to you. This can only happen 
once each day.


--- PAGE 285 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
284
The Coven
Description: The Coven exists anywhere there are 
peasants facing problems they can’t deal with on 
their own. The Coven have power and do use it to 
help - for a price. A price which always ends up being 
far greater than described. The Coven exist to prey on 
the good nature of others and take advantage of their 
troubles. So a farmer, wanting a cure for his diseased 
herd might make an agreement with a witch that his 
son will work for her for a year - his ca8le will be 
healed, but after the year of work his son will come 
back slack jawed and seemingly witless.  Or a woman 
might ask for good fortune with her business - then 
later on, her husband steals the gold she makes and 
runs off leaving her penniless once more. Agreements 
with witches are known as devil's bargains for a 
reason.
‘Hubble bubble toil and trouble! Is that what you 
expected?’ said Kristin with a laugh as she took the 
gift of herbs and put them on her kitchen table. ‘It’s 
not how you think it is, young man, not like that at 
all’. Jaume relaxed and wondered why he was so 
nervous. Kristin was just another hedge witch. Out of 
the window of her shack he could see a small blond 
haired child digging in the herb garden and he 
wondered why the others had been so wary of asking 
her for help. He took a seat on a wooden stool and 
waited as the woman, dressed in the usual woolen 
shift and robes of a servant,picked up the bundle of 
herbs and wandered over to her stove. For a moment 
she was absorbed in sifting and mixing the herbs on 
her stove until she turned back to look Jaume directly 
in the eyes - and he was transfixed with fear as the 
woman’s eyes blazed with an unnatural marshlight 
green 
and 
Jaume 
teetered 
on 
the 
edge 
of 
unconsciousness. As she held him with her gaze 
Kristin spoke again, but now her voice had the tone 
and timbre of a much older woman frail but at the 
same time full of certainty and power. ‘Let me tell you 
how it is, li8le fool. If you want my help, you must 
give something for it. A bargain must be made and 
the cost will not be easy to pay!’. The strange light 
faded from Kristin’s eyes and she turned back to 
sorting through the herbs. Jaume came back to his 
senses a few moments later, his breath heavy and his 
heart hammering in his chest. He got to his feet 
unsteadily and silently staggered out of the li8le 
co8age. ‘Come back when you are ready to pay, 
Jaume. Your wife won’t get be8er without my help’ 
said Kristin as he left. It was only on the way home he 
realised that he had never got to discussing the 
reason for his visit.
Motivation: The witches of The Coven are cruel and 
greedy. They have made an alliance with a dark 
power, usually a demon, and they enjoy using those 
powers to torment others and control them. Their 
purposes vary from witch to witch but most often it is 
simply for the pleasure of seeing other people suffer.
Mission Generator for The Coven - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-3 
As magic users the Coven employ a variety of magical effects and   
Winds of Magic
devices to achieve their aims.
4-5 
Witches are not priestesses but their magic is gifted from demons or  
Fury of the Gods
other powers; powers that expect to get something in return.
6 
Mere carnage is not particularly satisfactory for a witch, but it will  
Chaos Unleashed
suffice when other options aren’t available.


--- PAGE 286 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
285
Lair
City: The Coven like to hide in plain sight - their base 
of operations will be a small shack or hovel which is 
almost indistinguishable from any other. They are 
fond of a8racting urchins to act as errand boys, 
though in time some of them will mysteriously 
vanish…the cauldron has to be kept full, after all.
Dungeon: Witches prey on people - human, elf or 
dwarf - but there are always ingredients for the 
cauldron that can only be found in the dank corridors 
of a trap filled tomb. If they do need to be in a 
dungeon they will have fenced off a room or two and 
put in a space for the cauldron,. Even underground 
witches like to maintain the idea that they are simply 
the village wise-woman, and nothing more sinister. 
Wilderness: A simple hut, clean swept, with a garden 
of herbs and a coop of chickens at the back is an ideal 
home for a witch. Usually close enough to a path or 
road that a curious traveller might knock on her door 
and end up as fodder for the cauldron. 
Confrontation
Kristin Wert, Witch 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Devotion  
7 
Weapon:  
Dagger 
Armour:  
None (Dodge skill 4)
‘Oh, so you’ve found me out, have you, dear? How 
unfortunate..for you!’ With a shriek the witch will fly 
at you. Her disguise as a young woman falls away to 
reveal her haggard appearance, a face reflecting her  
foul nature. Her patron has granted her the power of 
Glamour. For rounds equal to her Devotion her eyes 
will glow with a fierce green light that fills anyone 
that sees it with dread - the effect is that All rolls are 
made with a penalty of -1. On the final (seventh) 
round her eyes blaze brighter and the Hero must test 
their LUCK or flee! By the time you have recovered , 
Kristin Wert has fled and you must track her down. 
Item: Carved Toadstool. Kristin Wert carries a 
crudely carved toadstool, which radiates magic. Once 
a day, the bearer can curse another creature to suffer 
-1 to all rolls for one hour. The toadstool can also rid 
the bearer of a curse, but that drains it for one week.
Henchmen
Entranced Man 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
8 
 
Weapon:  
Ba8le Axe 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass
It is a favourite trick of witches to place a glamour on 
some tough but stupid young man (often woodsmen) 
and use them as bodyguards. They may snap out of it 
when severely wounded - when reduced to 3 
STAMINA or less they Entranced Man must make a 
1d6 roll - on a 1 or 2 the enchantment lifts and they 
will fall to their knees and surrender. 
Retaliation
Curses: You have been marked as the victim of an 
unending stream of curses. Each day whilst you ba8le 
The Coven you must roll (at the start of the day) to see 
what happens. The curse lasts a day (when you get a 
new one!) or until you defeat your opponent.
Table 9.1.2 Curses. Test against your LUCK or suffer 
the effect described.
1 
Curse of Stench: A foul odour emanates from 
you, causing anyone nearby to feel nauseous. 
Suffer a -1 penalty to all Social tests.
2 
Curse of Withering: Evil magic weakens you as 
if you were ill. Lose 2 STAMINA.
3 
Curse of Clumsiness: Your limbs are not quite 
under control. Movement tests are at -1.
4   
Curse of Stupidity: Your mind is fogged! 
Knowledge and MAGIC tests are at -1.
5 
Curse of Cowardice: Fear courses through your 
veins. Suffer a -1 penalty to all combat skills.
6 
Curse failed! For some reason, the magic of the 
curse failed. Restore one point of LUCK


--- PAGE 287 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
286
The Inquisitor, Anna Gotval 
Description: The Inquisitor is a religious fanatic, a 
leader of cultists that acts in secret to corrupt the 
society she lives in and gain power for the terrible 
deities she worships.
The heels of her leather boots made a satisfying clack-
clack sound as the inquisitor marched along the 
marble-floored aisle of the chapel. It was built by her 
father, but he was long dead and it was hers now, as 
were the acolytes that knelt silently to either side. 
They knew be8er than to make a noise when she 
came to worship. 
At this late hour the chapel was mostly in darkness, as 
it should be, with only a few torches to either side and 
the altar candles providing a flickering, uncertain 
light. She felt a thrilling shiver of fear run down her 
spine as she approached the altar. It was a hideous 
thing; a rough stone basin, stained with dried blood, 
protruded from the base of a carving of her dark 
master. She surveyed it with awe - four arms ending 
in clawed hands spread out from a trunk composed 
of bodies melded together in torment. Two muscular 
legs bunched up under the torso ended with  
cylindrical elephantine feet. At the top a great rough 
head leered at her, with 4 great horns bending and 
twisting above it.
As Gotval reached the dias she first knelt and then 
prostrated herself full-length on the floor in front of 
the monstrosity. Her acolytes started a low moaning 
chant, just as she had trained them too. Breaking their 
will had been a pleasure. As she reached out with her 
mind to contact her master a brief flash of memory 
surprised her- the face of her father. He had built this 
chapel to worship some nature god, but it hadn’t 
helped him when the crops had failed and his people- 
now hers - had starved. She dismissed it coldly and 
refocused her mind on the task at hand, her master 
was not one for sentimentality.
Opening her mind and soul Anna Gotval awaited 
instruction; what infernal plans would he have for 
her this time? Images and phrases started to flood 
into her consciousness, slowly at first but then faster 
and faster until it became an almost unbearable 
assault, leaving her twisting in pain on the floor as the 
chanting of her followers reached a rage filled 
crescendo. At that moment she grasped the plan and 
broke the contact, unable to bear anymore. Shivering 
and exhausted the Inquisitor hunched herself into a 
ball before forcing herself to stand and turn toward 
the now silent congregation. ‘Our Master has shown 
me the way. Go and rest now, for tomorrow we have 
work to do’. Saying only that Gotval strode back 
down the aisle, the clack-clack of her boots once again 
the only sound in this unholy place.
Motivation: The Inquisitor is conducting a religious 
war 
against 
all 
unbelievers. 
Merciless 
and 
determined, she has sent out her agents with a variety 
of aims, either to recruit cultists to aid her or to 
weaken and demoralise the world until there are 
none strong enough to stand in her way. If you fail to 
defeat her in the first mission, roll next from the 
following categories.
Inquisitor Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-4 
The Inquisitor seeks to do her Master’s bidding on the mortal plane;  
Fury of the Gods 
recruiting cultists and bringing terror to her enemies
5 
Her dark masters have granted The inquisitor power over some    
Chaos Unleashed
creatures of chaos and she sent them out to wreak havoc 
 
 
6 
The Inquisitor feels it is time to advance her position, by weakening  
Lust for Power
her foes


--- PAGE 288 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
287
Lair
City: The Inquisitor has secured a small house or set 
of rooms which, helped by her cultists, she has made 
into a secret chapel dedicated to her devilish masters. 
From the outside it looks normal but on the inside the 
walls have been daubed with hellish symbols, the air 
is thick with stinking incense and dark cloths are 
draped across the walls and broken windows.
Dungeon: A room or set of rooms at the centre of 
which is a shrine to the evil gods, adorned with 
carvings. The candlelit altar is sufficient to carry out 
both rituals and sacrifices, the tools for which will be 
stored nearby.
Wilderness: An 
abandoned 
temple 
or 
shrine, 
desecrated and converted to service the ruinous 
powers. The main chamber may be underground, 
above ground the structure is decorated with ta8ered 
bits of cloth painted with religious symbols and with 
the ro8ing remains of sacrifices.
Confrontation
Inquisitor 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
12 
Devotion  
5 
Weapons:  
Mace (Demonfist) 
Armour:  
Chainmail Cuirass + Small Shield
The Inquisitor will fight toe-to-toe with you but will 
also, in the first round of combat, use the priestly 
power ‘Ill Luck’ (see the main gamebook for details). 
If the Inquisitor is reduced to 4 points of STAMINA or 
less she will call upon the dark powers of her god and 
transform into a winged demon! This instantly heals 
her of 5 points of STAMINA and transforms her - her 
skin becomes a dark blood red, her teeth become 
sharpened fangs and two huge wings sprout from her 
back.
In her winged demon form she gains the priestly 
power ‘Smite’ (this happens instantly and does not 
require a round to cast). Although transformed she is 
now looking to escape. If the Inquisitor, in this 
demonic form, wins two rounds of combat 
successively she will leap away and into the skies on 
her second round (this happens instead of dealing 
damage) and this means that the Hero must track her 
down again! However, the transformation she has 
undergone is permanent and the next time you fight 
her it will be to the death. As a demon, she has SKILL 
8 STAMINA 9 and no Devotion, but instead has the 
power ‘Smite’ (as per the main gamebook) as a 
permanent ability.
Item: Demonfist - the mace of the Inquisitor is made 
of black iron with the end shaped like a clenched fist. 
Demonfist counts as a magical weapon and adds +1 to 
the damage roll when you hit.
Henchman
Frenzied Cultist 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Mace 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass + Small Shield.
The Inquisitor has her fanatical cultists do her 
bidding in all things, they are quite willing to die for 
her if needs be. They will fight wildly, increasing 
damage by one point when they strike and hurling a 
string of curses and insults at the hero.
Retaliation
The Inquisitor is working to convert many people to 
her cause and once she realises that you are a threat, 
you will be marked for death. Every person could be 
a member of the cult - whilst you are tracking down 
the Inquisitor, every time you have a social encounter 
roll a 1d6 - on a result of a 1 they are truly a member 
of the cult and will a8ack you! (Use their scores if 
available or use the Frenzied Cultist details given 
above) This doesn’t result in a roll on the Lawbreaker 
table, even if it usually would.


--- PAGE 289 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
288
The Claws & Thorns
Description: The Claws & Thorns are a loose 
congregation of druids, rangers, barbarians and wild 
folk that abhor the destruction of nature that is 
brought about by the cities and towns of Titan. Often 
led by elves that were guardians of the wilds 
before the humans arrived.
Lortel the Swift stood atop the high stone bluff 
and looked eastward, across farmland, to the 
city bathed in the golden light of an autumn 
sunset. Using one hand to shade his eyes from 
the glare he scanned the walls, churches, streets 
and buildings, noting the teeming masses of 
humans, the smoke from their fires and the dust 
kicked up by their livestock. His elven eyes 
could see in great detail even at this distance 
and he stood for a while transfixed by the 
endless activity of the se8lement. Transfixed 
and disgusted. At long last he turned to his 
companions, like him dressed in the brown leathers 
and grey woollen cloaks of forest folk, and addressed 
them. ‘When the se8lers first came to this land, we 
welcomed them  but asked only that they should be 
careful, and treat the land and all that grows in it as 
you would your kin. They were weak and hungry, 
and their lords promised they would do as we asked. 
The land was kind to them and they grew stronger 
and in time forgot the promises they made. But we 
did not forget. They have grown too much, destroyed 
too much. Every year they take more and more, with 
no end in sight. My friends, the time has come for us 
to fight back. The city is strong, but the wilds are 
stronger!’
Motivation: The Claws & Thorns strike at cities in an 
a8empt to hold back the tide of civilization and 
preserve the wilderness. They do not think of 
themselves as evil - far from it, they regard most 
humans as careless and see what they do as a 
necessary, if regre8able, act of population control. 
Frequently they are worshippers of the Beast Lords 
and the other neutral gods such as Aqualis and Sukh
Claws & Thorns Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-4 
The city itself is an affront to nature and a wound upon her body; it  
Fury of the Gods 
must be weakened or destroyed to preserve the balance
5 
The Claws & Thorns have access to a number of beasts, brought out  
Chaos Unleashed
from the forests and caves of Titan and they are more than happy to 
let them hunt. Sometimes goblins, orcs and so on can be tricked into 
doing their bidding
6 
Finding powerful magic items or spells is one way that the society,  
Winds of Magic
which is small in numbers, can hope to prevail against the teeming 
multitudes


--- PAGE 290 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
289
Lair
City: As guardians of nature, the Claws & Thorns are 
uncomfortable in the city. They will have found a 
forgo8en piece of ground and hemmed it in with 
thorns that grew with unnatural speed. The 
entranceway is marked with a type of standing stone, 
engraved with a swirling pa8ern.
Dungeon: A part of the dungeon will be overrun with 
nature - vines crawling along the walls, fungus 
sprouting from the floor and a great number of 
crawling beasts and insects wriggling in the greenery. 
Wilderness: For the Claw & Thorns all the wilderness 
is their home; they are particularly a8ached to places 
rich in life such as ancient forests, waterfalls or ponds 
of clean, fresh water. The exceptional quality of the 
scenery is a sign that nature’s guardians are nearby.
Confrontation
Lortel the Swift 
SKILL   
5 (Staves 2) 
STAMINA  
14 
Devotion:  
6 
Weapon:  
Staff 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk.
Although slight in stature, Lortel has the wiry 
strength and vitality of a young ferret - well known 
for its cunning, tenacity and ability to take down 
animals much larger than itself. Unlike most of your 
opponents, Lortel is not truly malicious. He simply 
wants to preserve the wilds. Because of this he will try 
and reason with the hero whilst you fight, trying to 
persuade you to join his cause. He will fight entirely 
using the Defensive combat option. Each round you 
should roll an opposed test using Religion, Animal or 
Forest Lore (your choice) as you debate his actions. 
Lortel has Religion Lore skill of 8 and you should roll 
2d6 for him and compare it to your total. You need to 
win that argument (by winning the contested roll) ten 
times in order to convince him to stop his a8acks 
(should you do so you can consider Lortel defeated as 
an opponent and he will stop his a8acks).  Should you 
reduce him to STAMINA 6 or less he will use the Heal 
priestly power to renew himself, restoring 6 points of 
STAMINA.
After 15 rounds of combat (or debate, you don’t have 
to try and kill him!) Lortel will decide he has heard 
enough from you for one day - issuing a command, 
roots and tendrils burst from the ground and grasp 
your feet and legs. Lortel will transform into a very 
pine marten and dash away to find a new lair. 
Item: The Forest’s ear. If defeated, Lortel will leave 
behind an oaken ear-horn that allows the user to 
communicate with animals for 10 minutes per day. 
The animals are only able to ‘talk’ according to their 
natural intelligence however.
Henchman
Tree Man 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Branch x2, treat as Clubs. 
Armour:  
Heavy.
Lortel uses young Tree Men to act as his eyes and ears 
in the city - it’s dangerous work for them, but they 
have the perfect disguise as they can simply stand 
still and become just another tree. The Tree Men draw 
power from the earth and if they are in the Park 
location they will heal one STAMINA each round.
Retaliation
Lortel is frustrated that you are interfering with his 
plans and has sent a murder of crows to harass you. 
These smart creatures will follow you about, taking 
turns to swoop down to peck at you or even aim their 
droppings towards your head. If you try to retaliate 
they will flap away. This activity is highly distracting 
- when you have a social or challenge encounter, roll 
a 1d6. On a 1, the crows have got at you and you take 
a -2 penalty to all rolls for that encounter.


--- PAGE 291 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
290
The Necromancer
Description: The power of necromancy is fortunately 
a rare one as it nearly always leads to a desire to turn 
the entire world into a graveyard. 
From the Journals of Merrick Trench: My father was a 
poor man, a gravedigger. His income was not enough 
to afford both food and shelter, so my family lived in 
a crypt that had been abandoned. Pressed hard up 
against icy mountains, surrounded by a dark forest 
and blanketed in freezing mist, it was a place where 
people came to await their end in shared misery. 
Despite it all, I had come to cherish my home. I spent 
my childhood days playing in the graveyard, 
listening to the crows, staring deep into the empty eye 
sockets of the skulls carved upon the stones and 
playing a role in the theatre of the funeral rites. All 
this time growing up I had felt a deep connection to 
the dead. Their voices filled my dreams and even 
during the day I would see their spirits wandering 
the afterlife. More shockingly I found I could both 
talk to and command them - I kept this a secret.
I was still a boy when my mother and father 
succumbed to tomb-rot. As my father died, I saw his 
ghost form and rise up from his body. I took my 
chance and calling upon the whole of my willpower, 
forced it back into his body.  Since he had always been 
a quiet man it was easy to carry on as if nothing had 
happened. My father  continued to dig the graves. Of 
course this could only last for so long before someone 
noticed the smell of decay and duly I was discovered. 
Unsurprisingly, I did not receive much of a trial. I was 
sentenced to entombment - put back in my home 
(along with my ro8ing father) the door of the crypt 
was sealed and I was left to starve. Si8ing there in the 
darkness I wondered if this was the end, but I could 
still feel the presence of all the dead in the earth 
around me. I closed my eyes and called out to them - 
felt them stirring into movement, digging their way 
up, clod by clod, to the surface. I can only imagine 
how it must have seemed to the villagers as the 
ground beneath them shifted and rank after rank of 
corpses hauled themselves from their graves.
Firstly, I directed them to free me from my prison. As 
I emerged I made no great speeches to the terrified 
crowd. I simply directed my soldiers (I had 
immediately begun to think of them in these terms) to 
carry out my retributive justice. The screaming was 
short lived, after which I had a fresh batch of recruits 
to call upon. In quick order the village was cleansed 
of every living soul and I had a shuffling, clacking 
brigade of troops at my command. A few of the 
quicker villagers had mounted horses, escaping my 
wrath, and they would surely go and alert the king’s 
men to this abomination. Gathering up supplies I 
found myself an old pony that had been spared the 
carnage and set off. I knew I had a unique talent - now 
it was time to put it to use on a bigger stage.
Motivation: Merrick Trench is motivated by a 
combination of vengeance and obsession. He wishes 
to show the world his power and unleash the undead!
Mission Generator for the Necromancer - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-3 
It is the gods that have granted me this power over life and death and  
Fury of the Gods
it is to the gods I turn; through them I will test my resolution.
4 
The undead do my bidding as meekly as a flock of sheep before the  
Chaos Unleashed
shepherd, but there are others in the world that can be made to serve.
5-6 
In ancient texts and secret rituals I will find the secrets to understand  
Winds of Magic
my power and grow ever stronger. With more knowledge I will venture 
deeper into the realm of death. 


--- PAGE 292 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
291
Lair
City: Happiest when surrounded by the architecture 
of death, Merrick Trench has forced his way into an 
abandoned crypt. The inside barely qualifies as 
lodgings - just enough room has been made for a 
simple bed and a place cleared to accommodate a 
firepit and cookpot. The coffins and skeletons have 
been left in place by a man who seems to see them as 
appropriate decorations for a bedroom.
Dungeon: Many dungeons are tomb-like so the 
necromancer is quite at home in this depressing 
environment. He will partition off his room with a 
gate made of bones but apart from that change very 
li8le. Si8ing all day in the darkness is a sort of 
comfort to him, so apart from a cot and a cookpot it 
would be hard to determine that this was someone's 
home. 
Wilderness: Death stalks every part of the world; In the 
wilds, the Necromancer will have found a site that 
reeks of it such as a cave where bears have dragged 
their kills to eat in peace, or the site of a long forgo8en 
ba8le. Here he will make a simple camp, his shelter a 
tent of bone and hide. In the wilds around there will 
be a noticeably higher than average number of dead 
animals, left to rot with the flies buzzing around 
them.
Confrontation
Merrick Trench 
SKILL   
5 (Clubs 2) 
STAMINA  
13 
MAGIC  
5 
Devotion  
7 
Weapon:  
Mace 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk and Small Shield. 
Merrick has been blessed by the god of Death (though 
he is not a priest) and will use the power ‘Ill Luck’ on 
the first round and after that fight hand-to-hand, with 
one important addition. Merrick exudes an icy, 
energy draining aura. If he hits with his weapon he 
will cause one additional point of STAMINA damage 
which will also heal Merrick for one point of 
STAMINA as he drains the life out of the Hero.
The necromancer will not try to flee; instead, some 
time after he is defeated (and when no one is 
watching his body too carefully) he will rise up as a 
revenant and return to his work! This will become 
apparent fairly quickly and the Hero must track him 
down again. He may only return in this way once and 
there is a cost to it - he no longer has the ability to 
drain STAMINA from the Hero when they fight.
Item: Almanac of Ancient Sins. Found in the corner of 
a dreary crypt, this magical leather bound tome 
contains records of misdeeds. Once a day it can be 
held up in front of an undead creature and will 
chastise them; the target will be reduced to walking 
pace and unable to a8ack for three rounds. 
Henchman
Ghoul 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapons:  
Medium Claw 
Armour:  
Light 
Special: A Ghoul’s touch is paralysing - if the Ghoul 
hits you four times in combat you are paralysed and 
your fate is sealed. Of course none of the living would 
serve him, so Merrick Trench uses freshly raised 
ghouls to carry out his plan. Their will and 
personality have gone, but they have not yet decayed 
to the point of mindlessness and with a bit of make-
up and a hood can actually pass as human.
Retaliation
The necromancer calls upon the spirits of the dead to 
harass you. Upon defeating an enemy, roll a 1d6. On 
the roll of a 1, it comes back to life as a zombie version 
of itself and a8acks you again! The zombie version 
has its SKILL and STAMINA reduced by two 
compared to the real version. There is no limit on how 
many times each day this can happen. Unnerving!


--- PAGE 293 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
292
The Horde
Description: Have you ever wondered what happens 
when the Hero leaves? After the orc chieftain is 
defeated, or the power crazed magician laid to rest? 
Unless they are thorough - and thoroughness is rarely 
a quality of heroes - there will be loose ends. A pack 
of goblins that fled before they could be defeated, an 
ogre asleep in an unexplored sideroom, a pit of giant 
slugs that was passed by instead of being dealt with. 
Many of these creatures will simply crawl away into 
other deep holes but sometimes they band together 
under the leadership of the strongest of their lot and 
seek revenge on the civilised world of heroes. This is 
the horde - a motley collection of evil humanoids who 
leave a trail of destruction in their wake.
Thumper Grunk had spent a long, tiring day beating 
and terrorising the slaves in the mines, after which he 
had found a barrel of ale, drunk it and crawled into 
his secret den for a nice long sleep. When he awoke a 
day later he was surprised and confused to find the 
mines were empty of slaves but full of the bodies of 
his fellow trolls - clearly some hero had swept 
through and ruined everything! ‘Well well well’ said 
Grunk to himself, scratching his knobbly head, which 
was still sore from the ale. ‘Well well well, what’s a 
thumper like me going to do now?’ he pondered as it 
dawned on him he had no one around to beat.
For a while, Grunk just stayed in the mine. There was 
still some food and ale left, but gradually he began to 
run out of supplies and started thinking about what 
to do next. Some of the goblins had survived and one 
of the bears, but they were all starting to starve. One 
night, as Grunk stood at the entrance to the mine he 
spied in the far distance the lights of some human 
town and a sudden rage took him. ‘There’s no one to 
thump her and nothing to drink, all because of some 
stupid hero. It’s time old Grunk got to work (his most 
hated word) and got meself some new fleshbags to do 
all the mining and slaving. It’s time Grunk had some 
new squealers to thump’. With that idea now set in 
his mind, Grunk rounded up the goblins, put them in 
charge of the bear and set off. There were sure to be 
some other survivors he could pick up on the way, 
maybe another troll or two. The puny humans would 
stand no chance.
Motivation: The Horde have no grand plan or goal, 
other than destruction and carnage. They are like a 
swarm of locusts, moving across the landscape and 
leaving a trail of misery in their wake. Sometimes The 
Horde ends up ba8ling a force of humans, dwarves or 
elves but just as often they simply fall apart after a 
few months of pillaging.
Mission Generator for The Horde - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-5 
Unsurprisingly, The Horde focuses on a8acks that involve brute force  
Chaos Unleashed
or the use of dangerous beasts.
6 
Occasionally a shaman or priest joins The Horde and uses the power of  
Fury of the Gods
the gods to create havoc.


--- PAGE 294 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
293
Lair
City: The Horde will have a place to meet and plot, 
but it won’t be chosen with any great care. It could be 
a broken down hovel, forgo8en cave or cellar, with 
the only signs of occupation being some crude 
bedding and a firepit for cooking. They won’t bother 
repairing or decorating it. In fact, their presence will 
reduce it to the status of an abandoned hovel.
Dungeon: The Horde are not simply familiar with the 
dungeon environment, it is their home ground. They 
will occupy whichever part of the dungeon most 
reminds them of the hole they first crawled out of.
Wilderness: The Horde has a tendency to get lost or 
wander. If they do end up stuck in the wilderness 
they will do their best to make a crude camp from 
whatever vegetation is available but their preference 
will be to find a natural cave or shelter they can cram 
into. The surrounding countryside will see an 
increase in dead beasts and trampled or burnt plants, 
as they make no real effort to conceal themselves.
Confrontation
Thumper Grunk 
SKILL   
8 
STAMINA  
14 
Weapon:  
‘The Thumper’ (a large spiked club, 
treat it as a Morning Star for damage) 
Armour:  
Monster Heavy. 
Grunk never imagined anyone would be smart 
enough to find him and is so surprised to see you that 
he has -2 to his combat roll in the first round. On the 
second round (and every round after that) he will 
pull out and blow an antler-bone horn to summon 
help. Roll 1d6 at the start of each round, on a 1-2 a 
goblin (SKILL 4 STAMINA 6 Weapon: Club Armour: 
Light) will appear (climbing in through a broken 
window or dropping down from a hole in the roof) to 
aid their leader. He will continue to blow the horn 
each round so if you are unlucky a lot of goblins can 
flood the room, making it a very dangerous fight. If 
you choose to retreat they will let you go (you may 
retreat without suffering free a8acks from leaving 
combat), jeering and laughing at you as you go, and 
you must try to find Thumper Grunk again by 
starting a new mission. On any subsequent fight he 
will have healed his wounds but the goblins get 
bored of coming to the rescue and only appear on a 1 
on 1d6.
Item: Bag of Holding. An otherwise nondescript bag, 
Thumper has at some point picked up a Bag of 
Holding. This sack counts as one item for working 
out encumbrance, but can actually carry five items 
worth of goods without becoming any heavier. He is 
using it to store food and it has 4d6 meals worth of 
ro8en meat (heroes may wish to clean it before they 
use it).
Henchman
Wild Hobgoblin 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Short Sword x2 
Armour:  
Light. 
This Hobgoblin has been driven to the edge of 
madness by the slaughter of his tribe and now wields 
a short sword in each hand, choosing to swing madly 
instead of protecting himself. He will curse and spit 
at you as you fight, though you have no idea what 
he’s saying.
Retaliation
The Horde don’t have the planning or intellect to 
organise retaliation but the very presence of a swarm 
of angry violent monsters bolsters those allied to their 
cause. Whilst you are fighting The Horde every evil 
humanoid (orc, goblin, hobgoblin etc) you encounter 
has a bonus of +1 to SKILL and STAMINA. This also 
applies to all monsters in Catacombs, dungeons and 
the wilderness.


--- PAGE 295 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
294
The Emerald Scale
Description: The Lizardmen of Silur Cha control a 
great empire but are wary of the threat posed by 
humans, dwarves and elves. Thus they dispatch 
groups in secret - saboteurs - to do what damage they 
can. This involves finding mercenaries that are 
willing to carry out their work, as Lizardmen cannot 
move around openly. These groups of saboteurs have 
come to be known as ‘The Emerald Scale’ on account 
of the use of a pristine crocodile scale as a secret token 
of recognition between agents.
Ruthen Nive hopped out of his saddle, looped the 
reins of his horse over a nearby branch and made his 
way on foot up the path to the hidden den. As he 
moved into the shade of the trees he felt the hairs on 
the back of his neck rise and was certain he was being 
watched - well, of course he was. Anyone unlucky 
enough to wander up here uninvited would feel the 
sting of a poisoned dart before they had a chance to 
satisfy their curiosity. He shuddered to think of how 
the corpses would be disposed of - to his employers 
most humans were just another type of meat. 
Rounding the last bend he came to a path leading a 
short way along the base of a sheer cliff that marked 
the boundary between the mountain and its 
surrounding hills. Ahead, as the cliff jinked outward, 
he could see the cave entrance and it’s guards - two 
huge lizardmen dressed in thick hides and holding 
wicked looking spears. Ruthen shuddered but 
continued, he didn’t like to show fear in front of them 
- it made him feel like prey. Passing between them he 
entered the cave, which was lit by torches and 
surprisingly warm. Wisps of steam hung in the air, 
making the walls and floor slippery. Before long 
Ruthen came to the rear chamber and into the 
presence of Chel Vak, the leader of this band of 
lizardmen and Ruthen’s employer.
The room was set up in the lizardman style - a lot of 
heat and moisture. There was a natural pool here and 
Chel Vak had arranged for coals, firewood  and stones 
to be brought in and turned into a cunningly 
designed steamer upon which he was lounging, eyes 
half closed. Away from their warm homes the 
lizardmen needed a source of warmth like this or they 
would become sluggish and dull minded.
Chel Vak hissed as he entered and Ruthen dropped to 
one knee to show the appropriate respect. ‘I have 
done as you asked, mighty Chel Vak. Your plans were 
carried out one night ago, just as we agreed. I have 
returned to collect my reward and to find out how I 
might serve you again’. The lizardman hissed again. 
‘Yesss, you have done well my li8le human friend. 
There will be gold for you and plenty more to come - 
we have many plansss for you, if you ssserve us well. 
Soon I myssself will come to your city and you will 
make the preparationsss’. Ruthen grinned. It took a 
certain type of man to betray his own people for gold, 
but he cared li8le: He would take his payment, do his 
job and ride off to a new life once it was all over.
Motivation: The Emerald Scale are mercenaries and 
work for gold. They are willing to commit terrible 
crimes in return for treasure. Directed by the 
Lizardmen, these crimes are designed to weaken and 
disrupt the kingdoms of the world.
Mission Generator for The Emerald Scale - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-3 
The Lizardmen are determined to weaken their enemies without   
Lust for Power
resorting to warfare and have devised a number of schemes and plots.
4-5 
Crude a8acks are not subtle but they can be effective. 
 
 
Chaos Unleashed
6 
The magicians of Silur Cha are always keen to employ their skills or  
Winds of Magic
learn new magics.


--- PAGE 296 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
295
Lair
City: The Lizardmen, away from their homes, crave 
the warmth and humidity of the swamps. Thus the 
lair will be in a cave or underground passage - 
effectively a miniature catacomb - that contains access 
to a source of water such as a spring or underground 
river. Coals or magic are used to heat part of it to a 
suitable steamy temperature. If the Lizardmen need 
to escape they can dive into the water and slither 
down a pipe that is not visible from the above - they 
can hold their breath a lot longer than a human!
Dungeon: Very similar to their lair in the city, an 
underground watercourse will have been diverted to 
provide a pool and an escape route. Approaching this 
room, heroes will notice that the air becomes misty 
and damp.
Wilderness: Out in the wilds the Lizardmen will only 
make their camps at a place where there are natural 
springs or pools for them to bathe in. In warmer areas 
they will pick whichever is the richest in fish to hunt, 
and in colder areas they will look for natural hot 
springs to provide a base.
Confrontation
Chel Vak, Lizardman Shaman 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
12 
Devotion  
6 
Weapon:  
Spear 
Armour:  
Medium
When challenged Chel Vak will call upon the powers 
of the Lizardmen gods to fill the room with a cloud of 
steam, which lasts for 6 rounds and obscures visions, 
causing the Hero to suffer a -2 penalty to their combat 
rolls (Chel Vak is unaffected). If he is still alive at the 
end of this time, he will leap away into the water and 
make his escape and you will have to track him down 
again!
Chel Vak has also coated his spear with poison, so 
each time he hits you it inflicts one additional point of 
STAMINA damage that is not stopped by armour. If 
you defeat him you can recover a vial of this poison - 
there is enough to coat a weapon for one combat or 10 
arrows.  The poison has no effect on Lizardmen.
Item: Ring of Warmth. Ever fearful of the cold, Chel 
Vak has a magical ring that protects against the chill. 
The wearer takes one less point of damage from cold 
(including magical cold) and can use the minor magic 
spell ‘Weather Protection’ once each day.
Hench(lizard)men
Lizardman 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
11 
Weapon:  
Spear 
Armour:  
Medium. 
The Lizardmen are fanatically loyal to Chel Vak and 
hate warmbloods - they will a8ack ferociously. As 
with their leader they have poison coated weapons 
that will inflict one point of STAMINA damage when 
they hit, which is not prevented by armour. If you 
defeat him you can recover a vial of this poison - there 
is enough to coat a weapon for one combat or 10 
arrows. The poison has no effect on Lizardmen.
Retaliation
Chel Vak will not tolerate your interference! Calling 
upon the foetid powers of the swamp gods, he 
summons a Monstrous Fly (see encounter C28) to 
visit you. Each day make a roll to see when it finds 
you 1-2 between dawn and midday, 3-4 between 
midday and dusk, 5-6 it fails to find you. A new fly 
will come to search for you each day.


--- PAGE 297 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
296
The Nest Mother
Description: Ratmen are a constant menace across 
Titan and sometimes a powerful leader arises to lead 
them.
Deep beneath the cities of Titan, in the forgo8en 
crypts and clogged sewers, the ratmen live out their 
frantic lives in the darkness with clan ba8ling clan in 
wars that pass largely unnoticed on the surface. 
From time to time, however, a powerful matriarch 
emerges from this chaos and takes command of a 
large number of ratmen. This is the time of danger for 
humans, dwarves and elves as she will use her power 
to organise raids on the surface - not just hunts for 
food and weapons, but also sending out sappers to 
gnaw and scrabble at the foundations of the surface 
world. 
Many cities have been alerted to the rise of a nest 
mother only when a part of their se8lement collapsed 
overnight into artificial sink-holes. On top of the 
normal fear of these night stalkers, the ratmen carry 
with them the miasma of the crypts they inhabit - 
deadly chaos tainted diseases act like a second army 
supporting their a8acks. 
The only way to stop the a8acks is to defeat the Nest 
Mother and let the ratmen go back to fighting each 
other. Their numbers are too great to deal with 
otherwise.
Motivation: The nest mother’s motivation is primal - 
to increase and protect her nest, with its warren of 
tunnels and myriad squeaking inhabitants. To that 
end she will pursue whatever opportunities are 
available. She is intelligent, but not wise enough to set 
a long term strategy. The nest mother is capable of 
acquiring human allies, usually through bribery, and 
se8ing them to work for her.
Nest Mother Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-2 
The ratmen worship their own gods but recognise the existence of  
Fury of the Gods 
other powers, particularly those that are open to alliances.
3-4 
The Nest Mother obeys only one law; her own. She is always willing  
Chaos Unleashed
to unleash mayhem on others.
5-6 
The ratmen uncover or steal a great amount of treasure and there are  
Lust for Power
always humans willing to do their bidding in return for gold.


--- PAGE 298 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
297
Lair
City: The true lair of the Nest Mother lies deep in the 
earth, in the maze-like tunnels of her clan’s burrow, 
but in order to carry out a8acks on the surface 
dwellers she has chosen a small camp near to the 
surface. Connected to an unused sewer or abandoned 
cellar, this filthy room has been turned into a stinking 
nest full of squeaking rats nibbling at the bones of 
some unidentified creature. Dark tunnels - too small 
for people, but large enough for ratmen - branch off 
in all directions.
Dungeon: Ratmen see very li8le difference between 
most dungeons and the ruins beneath a city; they will 
convert a part of the dungeon to suit their needs by 
building narrow tunnels and filling the space with 
nest-like structures that hamper the movement of any 
heroes that enter.
Wilderness: The natural habitat of ratmen is close to 
human civilization, where they can scavenge and 
hunt, but they can survive in the wilderness. Here 
they will make use of a natural feature such as a cave 
or gully which they can turn into an enclosed, flea-
ridden lair. It’s likely that there will be many half 
eaten animals found in the surrounding area.
Confrontation
Nest Mother 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
12 
Armour:  
Monster Medium 
Weapons:  
Large Bite, Medium Claw (one a8ack 
with each). 
Consort of The Rat-King, the Nest Mother is a 
monstrous Ratman possessed of unusual cunning. 
Dressed in patchwerk leather robes (made from the 
hides of her vanquished enemies) and standing eight 
feet tall when on her hind legs, she has the strength to 
bind the clans together under her command. 
When you fight the Nest Mother, she will call on the 
swarm of rats in her lair to aid her. Each time you 
wound her (cause points of STAMINA damage) she 
will let out a screech of anger summoning a small 
pack of rats to burst out of the filth and fling 
themselves at you - the next round you suffer a -1 
penalty to your combat rolls as rats swarm across 
you, biting and scratching and you must roll 1d6. On 
a result of 1 the Nest Mother decides she has had 
enough of you for one day and dives away down a 
slimy tunnel whilst you are distracted by her minions 
- if this happens you must track her down again.
In addition to her normal a8acks the Nest Mother is 
as foul and putrid as her kin, with dirt and filth 
crusting her ma8ed hair and covering her wicked 
claws. After you fight her, you must test your LUCK 
or contract a disease (see Table 4.3.2 Diseases).
Item: Orb of Shadows. In a pouch at her belt she 
carries the Orb of Shadows - a glassy orb filled with 
swirling shadows, about the size of an apple. Once a 
day it can deepen the shadows around the holder, so 
they have +2 to their Sneaking tests for 10 minutes.
Hench(rat)men
Ratmen Assassin 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Sword 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass. 
Ratmen assassins are very stealthy. Make an 
Awareness skill roll when you come near them, or 
they will make their first a8ack from concealment 
gaining a +4 bonus on their combat rolls.
Retaliation
 Plague Bearer. Calling on the power of The Rat King, 
the Nest Mother summons a magical disease riddled 
rat to track you down and bite you. At the start of 
each day, roll a 1d6 - on a roll of a 1, the rat has found 
you during the night. Test against your LUCK or 
contract a disease - roll on Table 4.3.2 Diseases.


--- PAGE 299 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
298
The Syndicate
Description: The Syndicate are a group of like 
minded 
individuals 
who 
are 
completely 
unscrupulous when it comes to their ambitions, 
whether that be money, power or a twisted sense of 
pleasure.
Plo8ing in dark basements or remote towers might 
appeal to some, but the members of The Syndicate 
prefer the finer things in life and prefer to make their 
plans across a table replete with the finest delicacies 
the world has to offer, prepared by the best chefs 
money can hire. All of this is to be accompanied, of 
course, with fine wines from the best stocked cellars. 
Still, certain niceties must be observed. Each member 
in a8endance is wearing a mask and robed and 
hooded in black (satin or silk, not cloth) and it 
certainly isn’t rude to bring along a personal taster to 
prevent an ‘accidental’ poisoning. In addition all 
members are required to provide a code name by 
which they can be identified. The meetings are 
overseen by the Vaultmaster, the most senior and 
trusted member of The Syndicate who is responsible 
for arranging the meetings and compiling the guest 
list. A love of profit is not enough to earn an 
invitation, only the most cu8hroat and brutal of 
merchants can expect an invitation. The position of 
Vaultmaster is both a blessing and a curse. It allows 
great power over information and standing but 
incurs enormous costs, both in arranging the 
meetings and paying for ‘employees’ to protect The 
Syndicate from detection. Assassins aren’t cheap.
The purpose of The Syndicate is simple: to enrich its 
members as much as possible no ma8er what the 
consequences are for the people of the world. It isn’t 
simply 
about 
controlling 
trade 
routes 
or 
manipulating prices, The Syndicate is willing to go 
far beyond this. Starting a war to push up the price of 
weapons 
would 
be 
considered 
mundane. 
Assassinating a ruler that is opposed to slavery is 
troublesome, but not unreasonable. Unleashing a 
plague for which the only cure is a herb that is under 
your control would be something which might get 
you a round of applause over dinner. In the pursuit of 
gold, nothing is considered off-limits, even if it harms 
your ‘colleagues’ - in fact, reducing another member 
to the point where they can no longer afford their fees 
is the prize for many of those at the table.
Solomon ‘Silver’ Fox is not a dwarf of imposing 
stature, a fact for which he compensates by draping 
himself in extravagant jewellery (mostly silver of 
course) and hiring the largest men he can find as 
bodyguards. With his coiffured grey hair, a heavy 
combination of perfumes for scent and his acerbic 
wit, Fox makes sure he always stands out from the 
crowd - which usually consists of people he employs. 
Motivation: Fox has gained, lost and regained greater 
fortunes than most princes ever get their hands on. 
Currently he is doing well but his dreams are 
haunted by even greater avarice. To that end he has 
put in motion strategies that carry great risk - even a 
man of his wealth would not be able to bribe his way 
out of a charge of treason.
Syndicate Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-4 
The Syndicate pursues power relentlessly, with power comes fortunes 
Lust for Power
5 
Carnage is unpleasant, but also a source of opportunities particularly if  
Chaos Unleashed
you are the one directing it
6 
Although risky, magic can be harnessed for profit. A li8le dabbling is a  
Winds of Magic
chance worth taking.


--- PAGE 300 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
299
Lair
City: A member of The Syndicate in good standing 
must maintain a decent sized manor, complete with 
servants and the usual trappings of wealth, but this is 
not where they carry out their criminal enterprises. 
When you track them down you will find a concealed 
office probably in a nondescript building or 
warehouse. A sparse room, its only purpose is to 
house the ledgers and contracts recording those 
activities that are strictly ‘off the books’.
Dungeon: Often accessed by a secret or hidden door, 
the Syndicate will carve out for itself a well appointed 
area that is lit, swept and maintained more like an 
underground inn than a miserable dungeon. A suite 
of rooms will include a bedroom, office and 
guardrooms at a minimum.
Wilderness: Whilst unusual to find a member of The 
Syndicate so far from the centres of power, if they do 
need to spend time in the wilds they do so in 
reasonable comfort. Their lair will consist of a 
hunting lodge, with sufficient provisions.
Confrontation
Solomon ‘Silver’ Fox:   
Bodyguard: 
SKILL   
6  
 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
10  
 
STAMINA  
12 
Weapon:  
Dagger  
Weapon:  
Sword 
Armour:  
None.  
Armour:  
Chain   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hauberk
When you track Fox down, he will have a large man 
get between you and him - you must fight his 
bodyguard first, it is impossible to get at Fox with a 
melee weapon until you have dealt with his hired 
muscle. At the start of combat roll 2d6 - the total is the 
number of rounds you have to fight whilst Fox is 
destroying the evidence of his plans - burning le8ers, 
ripping up contracts and so on. At the end of this 
time, Fox will escape through a backdoor and sprint 
away - you’ll have to start over in tracking him down.
If you manage to defeat the bodyguard in time, you 
get to face Fox who isn’t much of a fighter and is still 
frantically trying to clear away the incriminating 
documents, so he will try and bribe you. Roll 10d6 - 
this is the total number of gold pieces that he offers. If 
you accept the bribe, lose one point of LUCK and be 
on your way - you’ll have to start again with tracking 
him down. The bribe is a one time deal, if you find 
him again he will fight. If you refuse it, you can fight 
him to the death there and then.
Item: Fox’s Sharp Eye. If defeated, your hero will find 
that Solomon has a jeweller’s eyeglass which when 
used to examine an object, grants +1 to tests of the 
Evaluate skill.
Henchmen
Sneaky Thug 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Weapon:  
Sword 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk.
The Syndicate employ all kinds of scum and lowlifes 
to do their dirty work. A quick trawl of the local jails 
is usually sufficient to find someone willing to break 
an arm or two in return for a fat coin purse. These 
thugs are tough but sneaky and will try to keep in the 
shadows. On the first round make an Awareness skill 
test or they have caught you by surprise and get a free 
a8ack with +4 to their combat roll.
Retaliation
The Syndicate defends itself by monetary means: 
Once they have identified a threat, the first step will 
be to pay off people to make life harder for the 
troublemaker. Whilst you are ba8ling The Syndicate, 
you should roll a 1d6 whenever you have a social 
encounter. On a 1 the NPC has taken a bribe and will 
refuse to help you - you cannot take the usual options 
and should simply move on to your next encounter. 
In addition, whilst you ba8le The Syndicate you have 
a penalty of -2 to all Bargain skill rolls, as the 
merchants don’t want to be seen dealing with you.


--- PAGE 301 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
300
The House of Swords
Description: Whilst many of the nobles of Titan are 
kind and generous folk, dedicated to improving the 
lives of the common folk, there are those that turn to 
more decadent pursuits.  In search of something more 
exciting they fight duels, send out spies and 
infiltrators, sabotage each other's plans and generally 
get up to no good. Over time, a code of conduct has 
grown up called ‘the House of Swords’ which allows 
them to carry out these diversions without causing a 
full scale war. The lives of the senior nobles are 
protected, but the peasants are not so fortunate and 
the machinations of the House of Swords can result in 
a great deal of carnage for those unlucky enough to be 
treated as pawns in the game.
‘Come on cousin, do get up’ A cruel smile slid across 
Azar’s face as he prodded Rollo’s back with the tip of 
his sword. ‘It just won’t do to let the servants see you 
this way’. Azar took a step back across the tiled floor 
to admire his handiwork. Rollo was on all fours, head 
hanging down, his body heaving with exertion as he 
tried to recover from the last blow. Blood was 
spla8ered beneath him, almost glowing like rubies in 
the sunlight streaming in through the high windows 
of the dueling room. Around the edge of the room, 
backs pressed to the wall, a crowd of masked 
onlookers and their servants waited quietly in 
anticipation of the end of the fight. Rollo took another 
shuddering breath and collapsed to his side.
‘I think you have me cousin’ said Rollo, clutching at 
the wound on his belly. ‘Will you let me yield?’ There 
was a mu8ering from the crowd as Azar paced 
around 
his 
prone 
opponent, 
considering 
the 
question. He looked up and caught the eye of his 
sponsor, the Count, who nodded once at him. So it 
was. 
‘Rollo my old friend....goodbye!’ Azar twirled his 
sword and darted forward, point aimed at Rollo’s 
heart, but the moments of parley had been enough for 
Rollo to recover a li8le of his strength. He rolled away 
from the thrust, leaving Azar unbalanced. As he 
tipped forward, Rollo slipped a dagger from his belt 
and thrust upward, catching the falling Azar square 
in the chest and spinning him across the room in a 
cla8er of spasming limbs until he came to rest, dagger 
protruding from his ribs, staring lifelessly up at the 
Count. 
‘What a disappointment’ mu8ered the older man, 
before turning and striding wordlessly from the 
room. There was a gasp from the onlookers followed, 
after a moment of stunned silence, by loud applause 
and cheering. Servants rushed forward to bandage 
and heal Rollo whilst some of the crowd also came 
forward to congratulate him on his victory. 
Motivation: Count Montagu de Hood is arrogant and 
cruel; he intends to beat his rivals and raise his status 
by whatever means available. 
House of Swords Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-4 
For all the pre8y words, in the end it comes down to violence of   
Lust for Power
some kind. The important thing is to make sure the violence happens 
to the other fellow.
5 
Magicians are rarely of noble breeding but their powers are certainly  
Winds of Magic
worth acquiring. A risky move, but magic must be made to serve!
6 
Carnage is an unsubtle device and slightly embarrassing in polite   
Chaos Unleashed
company, but it can be a useful distraction.


--- PAGE 302 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
301
Lair
City: The House of Swords have comfortable lives 
spent in the finest houses in the land and they have no 
intention of giving up these privileges even when 
trying to destroy the city around it. It will, however, 
be a property that has been rented under a false name 
or occupied without the knowledge of its true owner, 
just in case things go wrong. Either way it will appear 
to be a grand dwelling.
Dungeon: An unlikely spot to find a member of the 
House of Swords but if they must, they must. Part of 
the dungeon will have been partitioned off and 
cleaned up. Tapestries hung on the walls, torches 
placed in sconces, a fireplace and a well stocked 
larder at a minimum. A secret passage will connect 
the main room with a guard’s room, from where help 
can be summoned via a bell or gong.
Wilderness: Most nobles like to have a place in the 
country and the House of Swords have plenty of 
options in this regard. They won’t risk operating a 
criminal enterprise out of their main residence so this 
will be a decent manor house, probably stripped back 
to the essentials and guarded by groundsmen under 
strict instruction to deter investigators with force.
Confrontation
Count Montagu de Hood 
SKILL   
9 
 
STAMINA  
13 
Weapon:  
Sword 
Armour:  
Dodge Special skill of 4. 
Tall and slender, with a dancer’s build, the Count 
Montagu de Hood was an excellent duellist in his 
youth and now looks to replace the excitement of 
hand-to-hand combat with the thrill of pi8ing one 
group of nobles against another. He is not afraid of 
ge8ing his hands dirty, but prefers to work by 
manipulating others, particularly the young nobles 
that are looking to make a name for themselves.
The Count may be corrupt and greedy, but he is still 
of noble rank. Once he is injured below 8 points of 
STAMINA he will let out a cry of ‘Guards! Guards!’ 
and call for the Watch to help him. At the start of each 
round roll a 1d6 - if the result is 1,2 or 3 a group of 
Watchmen are nearby and burst into the scene, 
bundling you to the ground and stopping your 
a8acks. Before you can explain the situation the 
Count will make his escape and you must track him 
down again, however you have inflicted some 
injuries upon him and can reduce his SKILL by one 
each time you face him. Each time the guards come to 
the aid of the Count you can try to convince them of 
his guilt - roll against your Law skill. If you succeed 
they are persuaded and the next time you face him, 
they will not come to his help again in the future.
Item: The Count’s signet Ring. This heavy gold ring 
was enchanted long ago to sharpen the wits of the 
wearer. If you have it on your finger, you gain +1 to 
tests of your Law skill.
Henchman
Dandy Duelist 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Sword 
Armour:  
Dodge skill 3.
A young noble, eager for glory, who the Count has 
recruited to do his bidding. They are arrogant, brash 
and convinced of their own natural superiority. En 
garde!
Retaliation
The Count is annoyed with your interference and has 
bribed the Watch to go after you. Every day in the 
se8lement where you encountered him you must roll 
against your Law skill with a +3 bonus. If you fail the 
roll, your first encounter of the day will be with 
corrupt Watchmen - you must roll on the Lawbreaker 
table, though the minimum result on the table for you 
is six (the Watch can only push it so far).


--- PAGE 303 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
302
The Warlord
Description: For the orcs, raiding is a way of life. 
Humans, Elves and Dwarves are be8er at farming, 
building and crafting most things and it is easier - and 
a lot more fun - to go and steal from them than to 
work hard for yourself. Most raids are done by small 
groups but occasionally a particularly strong or 
clever orc will gather the clans together and form a 
warband that can sweep down from their caves and 
pillage larger se8lements.
The long summer day had finally ended and with a 
welcome darkness now covering the forest, Grark 
Gutburster emerged from his tent to survey his 
troops. Chewing on the juicy mu8on of a whole 
sheep's thigh, with his great hound ‘ Axemouth‘ by 
his side, Grark made his way around the camp 
making sure everything was to his liking. He had 
fought long and hard to bring these clans or orcs, 
goblins and hobgoblins together and turn them into a 
warband but still he had to fight everyday to stop it 
falling apart. The orcs would, if left to their own 
devices, rapidly fracture back into small groups each 
out for their own survival. Only by brute force could 
Grark keep enough of them together that he could 
plan and carry out raids on the humans that lived 
down on the fertile plains. 
Reaching the edge of his camp Grark came to the 
precipice of a cliff that marked the boundary between 
the forests that swept down from his caves up in the 
mountains to the plains that stretched out before him 
do8ed with human towns and farms. Still chewing on 
the sheep’s thigh-bone Grark looked across the 
landscape and started to plot his campaign. He could 
see a low pass where his warband could descend, a 
river that they could follow up to the farmsteads 
where they could pillage and resupply. Further on 
there were small towns and there, on the horizon, 
Grark could see a smudge of smoke lit by the last rays 
of twilight that marked the location of the great 
human city with its wealth of gold, slaves and 
plunder. That is why he had forged his warband and 
that is where he would go to find either death or 
glory.
Motivation: Raid! Pillage! Fight! The aim is to gather 
as much gold and plunder as they can and then 
retreat back to their caves before the civilised peoples 
gather an army (or a group of heroes) to destroy 
them.
The Warlord Mission Generator - Refer to Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
Roll 
Secret Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roll on the mission table under..
1-4 
What can be more enjoyable than unleashing your followers on the  
Chaos Unleashed
whining humans shivering in their cities. Nothing, that’s what.
5 
The orc gods demand blood and plunder. Let’s use their powers to  
Fury of the Gods
provide it.
6 
Amongst the humans, there are always those that will serve the orcs  
Lust for Power
for gold. The horde can always steal it back later anyway!


--- PAGE 304 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
303
Lair
City:  Grark has found a way to enter and leave the 
city as he pleases - a route through the catacombs that 
emerges into a cellar or basement that he has secured. 
The room has been cleared out , its main contents are 
a fire with a cookpot hung over it and some straw and 
furs put down on one side for bedding. There is also 
a concealed entrance at the back of the room - if Grark 
needs to make an escape he will dash through and 
use a cunning goblin mechanism to collapse the 
passage behind him as he flees.
Dungeon: At home in the depths of foetid dungeon, 
Grark will simply have commandeered part of the 
dungeon as his quarters - a part where a concealed 
exit allows him to slip away if required.
Wilderness: Orcs are not great builders and would 
rather sleep rough than bother building a structure. 
Still, as befits a warlord Grark has had some of his 
more skilled goblins build a wood longhouse 
surrounded by a palisade; it is not enough to be a fort 
and will have been built in a spot where the 
landscape conceals it. 
Confrontation
The Warlord 
SKILL   
8 
STAMINA  
14 
Armour:  
Chainmail Hauberk + Large Shield 
Weapon:  
Ba8le Axe (Knightbreaker).
Special:  
Grark Gutburster is particularly tough 
- he reduces all damage by one point.
Axemouth 
SKILL   
4 
STAMINA  
8 
 
Weapon:  
Large Bite 
Armour:  
Light
Grarks’ huge hound, Axemouth, will fight by his side 
and you must make a separate combat roll for it. 
Grark and Axemouth have fought together many 
times and despite its large size the hound is adept at 
darting out from behind Grark’s shield and body to 
nip at you. You cannot directly target Axemouth with 
melee or ranged a8acks whilst Grark lives. When 
Grark is reduced to 6 STAMINA or less he will 
command Axemouth to launch a final a8ack - the 
beast will leap up and, suicidally, hurl itself on top of 
you pinning you down. This gives Grark a moment to 
escape through a concealed exit. The next time you 
face him he will, obviously, be without his dog and 
will have to fight to a finish.
Item: Knightbreaker. The huge ba8le axe of Grark is 
magical and enemies hit by it suffer a -1 penalty to 
their Armour or Dodge skill rolls.
Henchmen
Doragar 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk 
Weapon:  
2-Handed Sword. 
The Doragar are tough and fearless warriors who 
have no fear of death. Even when reduced to zero 
STAMINA they will continue to fight for one round.
Retaliation
Grark 
Gutburster 
doesn’t 
want 
any 
heroes 
interfering. Once you are engaged in fighting him, he 
will send Goblin Infiltrator’s (See encounter C10) out 
to stab you until you give up. The goblins are 
cowardly; they will wait until you have a challenge 
encounter then a8ack. This will happen on your first 
challenge encounter (or combat in the wilderness or a 
dungeon) of the day and only once per day. You must 
fight the goblin in addition to dealing with whatever 
else you have to face. 


--- PAGE 305 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
304
9.2 Randomly Generated Villains
If, for some unfathomable reason, you are not 
satisfied with the villains provided this section 
provides you with some rules to generate a random 
villain of your own. Of course, a lot of detail will have 
to be provided by you but we are confident you are 
up to the task! If, for example, you find that your 
villain lives in a ship inside a dungeon, you’ll have to 
come up with an explanation for what that means 
(perhaps there is a lake deep underground, or 
perhaps they have just decorated part of the dungeon 
to appear ship-like).
Villains are divided into four domains - magic users, 
priests, ‘warriors’ and ‘power seekers’, which maps 
handily onto the ‘Winds of Magic’, ‘Fury of the Gods’, 
‘Chaos Unleashed’ and ‘Lust for Power’ labels given 
to the longer missions. This classification follows on 
to both the rules of AFF and the commonly 
encountered villains in fantasy culture, but of course 
you are free to mix and match components as you see 
fit. It might be difficult to explain why an orc warlord 
is seeking deep magical knowledge, but that could 
also be the start of an intriguing adventure.
Each randomly generated villain is given a 
motivation, a rough set of characteristics and abilities, 
a lair, some henchmen, a form of retaliation and a 
ba8le tactic to employ.
Domain
Firstly, roll to see what type of enemy you are facing. 
In the AFF rules characters are focused, through their 
skills, on four broad domains - magic, religion, 
fighting and professional, which covers those who 
develop social, criminal or business related skills.
Table 9.2.1 Villain Domain
Roll 1d6  
Domain 
 
Typical Villains
(reroll 5-6)
1 
 
Winds of Magic 
Wizards, sorcerers and other MAGIC based traditions.
2 
 
Fury of the Gods 
Priests and devout followers of a particular religion such as paladins or
  
 
 
 
 
zealots.
3 
 
Chaos Unleashed 
Warlords, barbarians and monsters - those who fight!
4 
 
Lust for Power 
Merchants, thieves and nobles conducting deadly intrigues.
Location
Next, find out where they are operating.  Of course, 
villains can move around, so this is really only their 
starting position! On 1d6:
  
1-2  
City 
3-4 
Wilderness
5-6 
Dungeon
Race
Humans are the most common people on Titan and in 
most se8ings and we can roll to determine the race of 
our villain on 1d6.   You should consider how the race 
of your adversary might affect encounters (elves and 
dwarves with darkvision might wish to fight at night 
for example) and locations (an undead villain 
probably doesn’t have a house in the city…or do 
they?)
1-2 
Human
3 
Dwarf
4 
Elf
5-6 
Other - roll again on 1d6:
1 
Orc
2 
Goblin
3 
Lizardman
4 
Demon
5 
Undead
6 
Director’s choice. 


--- PAGE 306 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
305
Winds of Magic
This domain encompasses any villain that uses one of 
the MAGIC traditions to gain power - typically 
wizards and sorcerers, but if you have access to other 
AFF rulebooks containing different traditions, such 
as the combat magic described in the AFF Combat 
Companion, those can also be used. Roll 1d6 - 1-2: 
Wizard, 4-6: Sorcerer, 5-6: Other or roll again.
In addition to some magical ability, these villains 
have points in special skills from the Knowledge and 
Magical sections of the skills list.
Characteristics and skills
Those that rely on magic are less physically capable 
than some other villains. They have SKILL = 3+1d3, 
STAMINA = 8+1d6 (sorcerers have 10+1d6) and 
MAGIC = 5+1d3. They have 3 points in the relevant 
special skill (MAGIC-Sorcery etc) and you will need 
to calculate their Magic Points and provide them with 
a list of spells to use. They have 2 points in Magical 
special skills and most Knowledge special skills.
Table 9.2.2 Winds of Magic Motivations
Roll 1d6 
Motivation
1 
 
Hunting for ancient magical artefacts or knowledge to increase their power
2 
 
Exceptional arrogance or pride in their magical ability
3 
 
Hatred or rivalry with another magic user
4 
 
Insanity - the study of magic has broken their mind and now they are dangerous
5 
 
Commanded: Your villain is serving a more powerful master - perhaps another humanoid, 
though it could also be a demon, powerful undead or a secret society
6 
 
From another domain. Roll 1d6: 
1-2  
Fury of the Gods
3-4  
Chaos Unleashed
5-6  
Lust for Power.
Mission Generator: Roll 1d6: 
1-3  
Roll on the Winds of Magic column
4 
 
Fury of the Gods
5 
 
Chaos Unleashed
6 
 
Lust for Power.


--- PAGE 307 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
306
Table 9.2.3 Fury of the Gods Motivations
Roll 1d6 
Motivation
1 
 
Rivalry with another church has spilled over into violence.
2 
 
By the gods' command! Your villain has been gifted a vision ordering them into action.
3 
 
Prophecy: The villain believes in an ancient prophecy, nothing can be allowed to prevent it from
  
 
happening as ordained.
4 
 
Proof of faith: Your opponent is trying to win the favour of their deity through their actions.
5 
 
Recruitment: Your opponent is trying to convert new followers to their cause, the a8acks are part
  
 
of this process.
6 
 
From another domain. Roll 1d6: 
1-2  
Winds of Magic
3-4  
Chaos Unleashed
5-6  
Lust for Power
Mission Generator: Roll 1d6: 
1-3  
Roll on the Fury of the Gods column
4 
 
Winds of Magic
5 
 
Chaos Unleashed
6 
 
Lust for Power
Fury of the Gods
In general, those that serve the gods most faithfully 
will be priests of some kind, though there are also 
zealots and templars that can follow this path. Roll 
1d6 - 1-4: Priest, 5: Templar, 6: Zealot. A templar in 
this case is defined as a villain that has taken the 
‘Templar’ talent described in the AFF Heroes 
Companion, meaning they have one daily ability, a 
devotion of 5 and no MAGIC characteristic.
 In addition these villains have points in special skills 
from the Knowledge and Combat sections of the 
skills list.
Characteristics and skills
Servants of the gods are expected to be both robust 
and wise. They have SKILL = 4+1d3, STAMINA = 
10+1d6 and MAGIC = 3+1d3. Priests have 3 points in 
the Magic-Priestly special skill and will need to be 
provided with powers. Use Table 7.1.3 List of the 
Gods in section 7.1 to determine which god is 
followed - generally a neutral or evil god should be 
chosen. Templars have only one power per day and a 
Devotion of 5. Zealots have no magical power and 
instead gain +1 SKILL. All have 2 points in 
Knowledge special skills and 2 points in Armour and 
one type of hand weapon (swords, axes etc).


--- PAGE 308 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
307
Chaos Unleashed
A broadsword cuts with both edges, and those that 
excel in the arts of combat can choose to defend the 
world against evil as great knights and captains or to 
use their skills for darker, more selfish purposes. 
These are warriors of some sort or another and it is up 
to you to flesh out the specific details. Are they 
heavily armed juggernauts swinging greatswords or 
lightly armoured duelists swishing their rapier? 
Almost every type of fighter can provide a 
challenging foe.
These villains have points in special skills from the 
Movement and Combat sections of the skills list.
Characteristics and skills
Warriors focus on being skillful and tough. They have 
SKILL = 5+1d3, STAMINA = 12+1d6 and MAGIC = 0. 
They have 2 points in Movement special skills, 3 
points in Armour and one type of hand weapon 
(swords, axes etc) and 2 points in another two 
weapon types.
Table 9.2.4 Chaos Unleashed Motivations
Roll 1d6 
Motivation
1 
 
Kill! Maim! Slaughter! Your opponent is motivated by a love of violence; they have no greater
  
 
purpose.
2 
 
Proof of valour - your opponent believes that their actions are proof of their bravery and
fearlessness.
3 
 
Your villain is in the pay of someone even more powerful, they are either a mercenary or part of 
a military organisation.
4 
 
Relic - your opponent has heard tales of some fantastical weapon or suit of armour and is
  
 
pursuing that.
5 
 
The best part of war is dividing the spoils - your villain is aiming to gather as much gold as 
possible. 
6 
 
From another domain. Roll 1d6: 
1-2  
Fury of the Gods
3-4  
Winds of Magic
5-6  
Lust for Power
Mission Generator: Roll 1d6: 
1-3  
Roll on the Chaos Unleashed column
4 
 
Winds of Magic
5 
 
Fury of the Gods
6 
 
Lust for Power


--- PAGE 309 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
308
Lust for Power
Perhaps the most varied group of villains, those with 
a lust for power could be merchants, thieves, nobles 
or just desperate but talented individuals that have 
the charisma to draw others into their schemes. They 
could be called ‘the professionals’ as they rely on 
acquired skills rather than powers or brute strength. 
It could be a magistrate that knows how to break the 
law or a braggart with a love of inciting riots. Roll 
1d6: 
1 
 
Merchant or Wealthy individual
2 
 
A criminal of some kind
3 
 
A noble
4-6  
Other (your choice).
These villains have points in special skills from the 
Stealth and Knowledge sections of the skills list.
Characteristics and skills
These villains focus on using their special skills to 
achieve their aims, though they are generally not 
afraid of a bit of combat. They have SKILL = 4+1d3, 
STAMINA = 10+1d6 and MAGIC = 0. They have 2 
points in Stealth special skills, 2 points in Armour and 
one type of hand weapon (swords, axes etc) and 2 
points in two out of Bargain, Con, Etique8e, Law or 
Leadership.
Table 9.2.5 Lust for Power Motivations
Roll 1d6 
Motivation
1 
 
Gold - your opponent is looking to amass a great fortune.
2 
 
Your opponent is working for a shadowy hidden power to which they are totally loyal.
3 
 
The activities of your opponent are, to them, simply part of some larger game, perhaps even a 
wager. 
4 
 
Your opponent is looking for a way to increase their social status by undermining others.
5 
 
The villain has envisaged a grand plan for world domination and is pursuing it relentlessly.
6 
 
From another domain. Roll 1d6: 
1-2  
Fury of the Gods
3-4  
Winds of Magic
5-6  
Chaos Unleashed
Mission Generator: Roll 1d6: 
1-3  
Roll on the Lust for Power column
4 
 
Winds of Magic
5 
 
Fury of the Gods
6 
 
Chaos Unleashed


--- PAGE 310 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
309
Equipment, 
Lair, 
Henchmen, 
Retaliation, 
Confrontation
A villain is nothing without the trappings of villainy. 
The following tables provide you with descriptions of 
their lair, henchman, retaliation and ba8le tactics. The 
tables apply to all types of villain and are not split by 
domain. How you interpret the results is up to you 
and as usual you may wish to adjust the results to 
be8er suit your particular se8ing or campaign.
Equipment
As with all villains they should be provided with 
equipment that reflects their status as a leader and 
powerful ‘hero’ in their own right. It is assumed that 
they have had time to obtain and spend a reasonable 
sum of gold. Beyond that, their equipment should 
reflect their domain. Magic using villains will be 
armed and armoured according to their magical 
tradition. Wizards will be in robes and carry a staff or 
dagger, sorcerers will wear armour and carry a melee 
weapon. Religiously inclined villains will be armed 
and armoured according to the edicts of their gods. If 
no specific information is provided, they should be 
equipped with appropriate armour, shields and 
weapons. Martially inclined villains should be 
equipped with appropriate armour, shields and 
weapons. Equipment for ’professional’ villains 
should reflect their style or trade. A master thief 
might be equipped with poisoned daggers, a 
merchant should have superior quality weapons and 
armour. 
It may be useful to look at the pre-wri8en villains in 
the earlier part of this chapter to get some ideas about 
what equipment your opponent will have access to.
Lair
The lair is the home and sanctum of your villain, a 
place where they store their treasures and plot their 
next move. Create one that is appropriate or roll on 
the table below.
Table 9.2.6 Villains Lair
Roll 2d6 
Lair
2 
 
They have no lair and wander; their belongings carried by porters from place to place.
3 
 
A library or laboratory with adjoining living quarters, the state of the library depends on the
  
 
owner.
4 
 
An ancient crypt or tomb, depending on the villain they may have cleaned it up or not.
5 
 
A tower, full of strange and dangerous objects.
6 
 
Normal housing that looks unremarkable from the outside, but on the inside has been decorated 
and altered to reflect the owners ‘passions’ (arcane symbols for a wizard, weapons and skulls for 
a warlord and so on).
7 
 
An underground complex, its state and decoration reflect the owners needs and tastes.
8 
 
A natural feature such as a cavern or glade which the villain has occupied and fortified.
9 
 
An abandoned temple (if the villain is a priest or cultist, it will have been re-dedicated to the 
worship of their god).
10 
 
A large tent or yurt, complete with rugs, tapestries and an ornate stove, moved around on a set of 
wagons when required.
11 
 
A ship or barge fi8ed out with luxurious cabins and a whole deck dedicated to the villains' 
pursuits.
12 
 
A small magical realm, a li8le bubble of reality that is somehow connected to your villain. When 
they die, it disappears! (the hero has just enough time to grab the treasure and leap to safety).


--- PAGE 311 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
310
Henchman
A good villain needs a right hand man or woman to 
assist them in their carnage. These are not simply 
cannon fodder but trusted members of your 
opponents team.
Table 9.2.7 Villain's Henchman
Roll 2d6 
Henchman - they fight to the death unless stated otherwise.
2 
 
They have no henchman; if you succeed in a mission you always get to fight them!
3 
 
Entranced Man SKILL 6 STAMINA 8 Weapon: Two Handed Axe Armour: Leather Cuirass. A 
young man has been magically entranced to serve as a henchman. They may snap out of it when 
severely wounded - when reduced to 3 STAMINA or less make a 1d6 roll - on a 1 or 2 the 
enchantment lifts and they will fall to their knees and surrender. You may spare them if you wish.
4 
 
Tree Man SKILL 5 STAMINA 8 Weapon: Branch x2, treat as Clubs. Armour: Heavy. Somehow, 
your opponent has obtained the services of some Tree Men to serve as their henchmen. These 
tough plants take double damage from fire based a8acks.
5 
 
Ghoul SKILL 6 STAMINA 8 Weapons: Medium Claw Armour: Light Special: A Ghoul’s touch is 
paralysing - if the Ghoul hits you four times in combat you are paralysed and your fate is sealed. 
6 
 
Thug SKILL 6 STAMINA 9 Weapon: Sword Armour: Leather Hauberk and Small Shield. Make 
an Awareness test on the first round to spot them as they spring from the shadows. If you fail, 
they get +4 to the combat roll for that round.
7 
 
Mercenary SKILL 6 STAMINA 9 Weapon: Sword Armour: Chain Cuirass and Small Shield. The 
mercenary has been paid to fight, but not to die - when reduced to 2 STAMINA or less they will 
surrender.
8 
 
Lizardman SKILL 5 STAMINA 11 Weapon: Spear Armour: Medium. They have poison coated 
weapons that will inflict one point of STAMINA damage when they hit, which is not prevented 
by armour. If you defeat him you can recover a vial of this poison - there is enough to coat a 
weapon for one combat or 10 arrows. The poison has no effect on Lizardmen.
9 
 
Apprentice SKILL 4 STAMINA 8 MAGIC 3 (Arcane Power 5) Weapon: Staff Armour: None 
(Dodge skill 2). They will fight using the spells ‘Weakness’ in the first round and then ‘Flash!’ after 
which they will use their staves and fight hand-to-hand. They are ultimately cowards - if reduced 
to STAMINA of 2 or less they will surrender. In tears. It’s up to you what you do about that.
10 
 
Cultist SKILL 6 STAMINA 8 Weapon: Mace (+1 damage) Armour: Leather Cuirass. The Cultist 
has no priestly powers but is fanatically loyal to their master; they will fight to the death.
11 
 
Doragar SKILL 6 STAMINA 9 Armour: Medium Weapon: 2-Handed Sword. The Doragar are 
tough and fearless warriors who have no fear of death. Even when reduced to zero STAMINA 
they will continue to fight for one round in a show of heroic loyalty.
12 
 
Roll twice on this table and when you encounter a henchman, you encounter both - good luck!


--- PAGE 312 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
311
Retaliation
Once you have completed your first mission against 
this opponent they will be aware of your presence 
and may try to stop you pursuing them. After the first 
mission and until you defeat them, roll to see what 
type of retaliation they send against you.
Table 9.2.8 Villain's Retaliation
Roll 2d6 
Retaliation
2 
 
Your opponent is extremely upset with your meddling - roll twice on this table and apply both 
effects!
3 
 
Animated Club: Each day roll 1d6. On a 1 or 2 an animated club appears at your location (roll 
another 1d6 to see when this happens - 1-2: morning, 3-4: midday, 5-6: evening). The club has 
SKILL 8 but as per the ‘Animate’ spell, if it loses a combat round the spell ends. It does damage as 
a normal, non-magical club.
4 
 
Curse of plagues: your opponent has put you under a curse, each day roll 1d6. On a roll of one 
you have been struck by a disease - roll on Table 4.3.2 Diseases to see which - normal methods of 
curing it apply.
5 
 
Traitors: When you have a social encounter roll a 1d6 - on a result of a 1 they have been ‘turned’ 
by your enemy and will a8ack you! This doesn’t result in a roll on the Lawbreaker table, even if 
it usually would.
6 
 
Goblin Infiltrator: The villain has hired goblin’s to track and fight you. Each time you have a 
challenge encounter or combat a Goblin Infiltrator (encounter C10) will appear to fight alongside 
your enemy - this can only happen on the first fight of the day.
7 
 
Assassin. Your opponent has hired assassins to pursue you. Each day roll 1d6, on a roll of 1 an  
assassin a8acks you (1-2: morning, 3-4: midday, 5-6: evening). The Assassin has SKILL 6 
STAMINA 9 Weapon: Short Sword Armour: 3 points of Dodge skill. You must make an 
Awareness test with a -3 penalty at the start of the combat - if you fail the assassin gains +6 to her 
combat roll and +2 to her damage roll on the first round as they leap from the shadows.
8 
 
Traps: Your opponent has employed a rogue to set traps for you; when you move to a new 
location, area or dungeon section roll 1d6 - on a roll of one you have stumbled into a trap. Roll on 
the Table 4.4.2 Traps.
9 
 
Zombie: Upon defeating an enemy, roll a 1d6. On the roll of a 1, it comes back to life as a zombie 
version of itself and a8acks you again! The zombie version has its SKILL and STAMINA reduced 
by two compared to the real version. There is no limit on how many times each day this can 
happen. Unnerving!
10 
 
Swarm: Biting insects are sent to plague you. Before any fight, roll 1d6 - if you roll a one, 
something is gnawing at you causing -1 to your skill tests for that combat, unless you want to 
spend two rounds finding the bug and squashing it.
11 
 
Undeath: Upon defeating an enemy, roll a 1d6. On the roll of a 1, it comes back to life as a zombie 
version of itself and a8acks you again! The zombie version has its SKILL and STAMINA reduced 
by two compared to the real version. There is no limit on how many times each day this can 
happen. Unnerving!
12 
 
Your enemy is focusing on their plans and fails to send any retaliation your way. Fortunate!


--- PAGE 313 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
312
Confrontation / Ba=le Tactic
Whilst you (the hero) may wish to fight to the death 
on the first encounter, your opponent might see it 
otherwise. They will have a ba8le tactic, something 
they will use to either try and win the fight or escape 
to continue their evil doing.
Table 9.2.9 Villain's Ba=le Tactic
Roll 2d6 
Ba3le Tactic
2 
 
No tactics, just glory! The villain has no special plans up their sleeves and fights to the death.
3 
 
Vanishing act: The villain would like to defeat you but also has things to do! Each round you fight 
roll 1d6 - on a roll of one they will distract you with a smoke bomb (-6 to combat rolls for one 
round) and flee.
4 
 
Wary fighter: Roll 1d6 each round, on a 1 or 2 the villain will take the ‘defensive’ combat option 
adding +2 to his combat roll but not causing any damage. The fourth time they do this, they will 
trick you with a feint and take the chance to flee.
5 
 
Swarms: Every time the villain is wounded they call upon a swarm of rats or scorpions to bite you 
for one point of STAMINA damage (no Dodge or Armour applies).
6 
 
Thunderbolt: At the start of the combat roll 2d6: After that number of rounds your opponent calls 
upon a dark power to smite you: test your LUCK or you are stunned and the villain can flee.
7 
 
Bodyguard: The villain has a bodyguard SKILL 6 STAMINA 9 Weapon: Mace Armour: Leather
Hauberk that fights for him; if you fail to defeat the bodyguard within five rounds your opponent 
has fled. The villain takes a week to find a replacement during which time they are unprotected.
8 
 
Mirror Images: The villain has an item that creates two illusory images of themselves. To spot the 
actual villain you must pass an Awareness skill test, if not you a8ack an image. The images persist 
for eight rounds, at which point the villain will a8empt to flee. 
The item has two charges.
9 
 
Hypnotic Stare: The villain will try to entrance you and convince 
you to leave them alone. Test against your SKILL or LUCK (your 
choice) or you are ensnared by their charisma and let them flee. 
You must test at the start of the combat and every third round 
after that. Each time you fight them you get a +2 bonus to your 
tests (+2 on the second time, +4 on the next and so on).
10 
 
Potion of STAMINA: When reduced to 4 STAMINA or less the 
villain will glug down a potion of STAMINA restoring their lost 
health. If you don’t defeat them, it takes them a week to purchase 
a new one.
11 
 
Resurrection: The villain will fight to the death, but only because 
they know they have a second chance at life! Once killed, they 
will return to life as a revenant - reduce their SKILL by 1, 
STAMINA by 2 and MAGIC by 1 - the next time they are killed 
it’s permanent.
12 
 
Well prepared: Your opponent has been careful to ensure their 
own survival - roll twice on this table and apply both ba8le 
tactics to your confrontation.


--- PAGE 314 ---

Chapter 9 - Villains
313
Creating Patrons and Allies
Whilst this section is focused on creating villains, it 
can also be used to help build patrons and allies that 
are friendly to the hero. All that is needed is to make 
the same rolls as before, but reinterpret some of the 
results. So if you rolled the motivation ‘Gold - your 
opponent is looking to amass a great fortune.’ for 
your patron you could interpret that to mean your 
friend has an interest in making sure that trade is 
carried out fairly and honestly.
What role any patrons or allies play in your 
adventures is up to you, if you wish to include them 
this section and Chapter 7 can be combined to give 
you some ideas about their motivations and 
trappings.
Summary
Using the tables in this section will allow you to 
create a villain to oppose your hero or heroes, but 
these are just the details or bare bones required to 
build an interesting and challenging foe.
You will need to use your own imagination to round 
them out; give them a name, description and so on. 
You may also wish to add more details by looking at 
Chapter 7, which covers political systems, religion, 
social status and creating factions. Those things are 
not required but will add depth and colour to your 
foe.
Most importantly, if you come up with a be8er or 
more suitable idea for any of the details, you should 
add them in  - as with much of this book the intention 
is to support your game rather than dictate exactly 
how to play.
Example of a Randomly Created Villain
To help you understand the ideas in this section, we 
have gone through and used this system to create a 
villain we could use in our adventures. At the start we 
have no idea what we will end up with - we will roll 
the dice and let a picture emerge, always 
remembering that we can change any of the results if 
they don’t fit into our campaign or se8ing, or we 
simply think of an option that is more appealing.
Type: We start off by finding out what type of person 
we are dealing with by rolling on Table 9.2.1 ‘Villain 
Domain’ and with a 3 the result is ‘Chaos Unleashed’, 
which covers warlords, monsters and the like - those 
who fight and make their way through force of arms.
Location:  Next we roll for location, with another 3 
meaning our villain starts off in the wilderness. Of 
course, this is merely their starting point and we 
could still begin our adventures in a city or a dungeon 
if we wish, as our opponent is 
Race: With a roll of 2 our opponent is a human. The 
most common outcome so it is not unexpected - there 
are villains in every group of people, but there are 
simply more humans around in the world.
Characteristics and Skills: As per the guidance we 
roll 1d3+5 for SKILL ge8ing a total of 7 and 1d6 + 12 
for STAMINA ge8ing a total of 18 (ouch!) so our 
villain is very tough. They also have some special 
skills (2 points in Movement special skills, 3 points in 
Armour and one type of hand weapon (swords, axes 
etc) and 2 points in another two weapon types) which 
we can assign now or leave to the end - as we learn 
more about our enemy, it might give us ideas about 
what sort of weapons and other skills they would 
have. We do know that with 3 points in a weapon skill 
and SKILL of 7 this will be a dangerous enemy to face 
in hand to hand combat, and with 3 points in the 
Armour skill they should be equipped with a decent 
level of protection.


--- PAGE 315 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
314
Motivation: Each villain has a table for motivations. 
With a roll of 1 on Chaos Unleashed table 9.2.4 we 
find out that the motivation for this villain is ‘Kill! 
Maim! Slaughter! Your opponent is motivated by a 
love of violence; they have no greater purpose’ which 
is pre8y straightforward, they love to fight. On the 
same table we also have a mission generator which 
we can use with Chapter 10 to create missions and 
quests for this villain should we want to.
Equipment: All villains should be provided with 
equipment that reflects their status as a leader and 
‘hero’ in their own right. In this case our warrior will 
be given a breastplate and a ba8leaxe. We may add 
some other pieces later on and of course there is an 
assumption that they have access to standard 
equipment such as a backpack, rations, water skin 
and so on. We might want to give them a magical 
item or two, but we can leave those details for later.
Lair: Rolling on table 9.2.6 ‘Villains Lair’ we get a total 
of 5 meaning ‘A tower, full of strange and dangerous 
objects’ which might be surprising for a bloodthirsty 
warrior, but maybe they discovered it or killed the 
previous occupant. That’s something to think about 
but there are plenty of solutions. It’s important to 
note that our villain is not confined to this place 
(which we know, from our location roll, is in the 
wilderness), it’s just their starting point.
Henchman: 
Table 
9.2.7 
‘Villain’s 
Henchman’ 
provides us with a list and a roll of 11 means our 
warrior is accompanied by some ‘Doragar SKILL 6 
STAMINA 9 Armour: Medium Weapon: 2-Handed 
Sword. The Doragar are tough and fearless warriors 
who have no fear of death. Even when reduced to 
zero STAMINA they will continue to fight for one 
round in a show of heroic loyalty’ which seems quite 
appropriate. If you are using the missions system 
described in Chapter 10 you may come across 
henchmen, if not you could use these as the 
bodyguards for your villain, or guards for their lair.
Retaliation: Once you have completed your first 
mission against this opponent they will be aware of 
your presence and may try to stop you pursuing 
them. Rolling on table 9.2.8 ‘Villain’s Retaliation’ we 
get a 9, so it’s ‘Zombie: Upon defeating an enemy, roll 
a 1d6. On the roll of a 1, it comes back to life as a 
zombie version of itself and a8acks you again! The 
zombie version has its SKILL and STAMINA reduced 
by two compared to the real version. There is no limit 
on how many times each day this can happen. 
Unnerving!’ How is a rampaging warrior causing 
this? Remember that the world of Titan is a place of 
magic. Perhaps our villain has come across an item 
that can cause this effect, or perhaps they are being 
protected by one of the evil gods. This is something to 
think about and we can change the nature of the 
retaliation if we want to, but it’s probably more fun to 
come up with a reason why our rampaging fighter is 
making corpses rise again as undead.
Confrontation / Ba=le Tactic:  Villains have plans of 
their own and you may be seen as merely an 
annoying interruption. Rolling on table 9.2.9 
‘Villain’s Ba8le Tactic’ we get a 6 meaning 
‘Thunderbolt: At the start of the combat roll 2d6: After 
that number of rounds your opponent calls upon a 
dark power to smite you: test your LUCK or you are 
stunned and the villain can flee.’ which will be 
interesting, given our villain has a very high 
STAMINA and will be hard to defeat quickly. This is 
probably a magic item and we should be fair and 
make sure our hero is allowed to recover it.
Finishing touches
The results of our rolls have certainly given us a 
villain we can use, but there is more we can add to 
make them more rounded. The extent to which you 
do this should be based on how much time you think 
you will spend ba8ling this particular opponent. Are 
they a main enemy in your campaign or se8ing, or 
just a passing bad guy? Only you can decide. 


--- PAGE 316 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
315
10 - MISSIONS, QUESTS AND ADVENTURES
In order to start your adventures you need four 
things - a hero, a map, a villain and a mission  - some 
way for your hero to prove their heroism! It’s highly 
unlikely that your opponent will simply jump out in 
front of you and challenge you to a duel to the death 
and much more likely that your hero will have to 
work their way towards ba8ling them by taking on 
missions that thwart their evil plans or provoke them 
into a confrontation. 
When a hero takes on a series of missions (or quests 
or adventures as they are often called) we call that a 
campaign. Unlike the individual missions, which 
have well defined objectives for you to complete (find 
a cultist temple, recover ancient runes and so on) the 
campaign is supposed to build up to a larger goal - 
saving a kingdom, defeating a great evil.
In chapter 9 we have discussed villains - the 
opponents that you must 
fight against and in this 
chapter we look at how to 
create and manage the 
missions, 
quests 
and 
adventures that make up a 
campaign.
It should be noted that 
your hero does not have to 
have a an over-arcing goal 
or aim, they can simply 
wander from place to 
place seeing what needs to 
be 
done 
or 
fighting 
monsters as they find 
them. There is no correct 
way to play the game as 
long as you are having 
fun. 
Starting A Campaign
A campaign is a series of linked missions, quests & 
adventures with an overarching goal, usually the 
defeat of some evil villain or group (though that is up 
to your Director). It can start in any number of ways 
but two of the most common are the hero responding 
to an event or by starting with the villain and 
working out what they are planning.
In chapter 9 we have and provided you with some 
examples including their motivations, which are 
linked to the campaign missions in section 10.1. This 
will allow you to start by choosing an opponent and 
then rolling to see what type of task they have placed 
before you.
If you prefer, you can start your adventures without 
knowing who your opponent is by beginning with an 
event. 
Your 
opponent 
(who is unknown to you 
initially) 
has 
put 
into 
motion some terrible plan 
which is sure to result in 
chaos and destruction. It is 
up to you to stop them.
Roll on the table to see 
what has happened, this 
will determine what type 
of mission you start out 
with as you take on the 
role of hero of the city. 
Obviously, 
you 
can 
substitute 
any 
other 
similar event that you can 
think of - the following are 
merely examples to get 
you started.


--- PAGE 317 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
316
Table 10.1 Starting Events
Roll 1d6 
Event  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mission & Villain Category
1 
 
A few nights ago a great storm of unnatural origins ba8ered the   
Winds of Magic
lands, it seemed to come out of nowhere. Even worse, a number 
of strange events occurred. A rain of frogs spla8ered down 
across the slums, an ancient statue was seen to get down from its 
pedestal and walk and sheep and cows flew in the air like dandelion 
wisps! Clearly, something is afoot and needs to be investigated.
2 
 
Last night, a temple was a8acked and desecrated! This has shaken  
Fury of the Gods
the populace. If the gods can’t protect themselves, who can? If people 
lose their trust in the gods, evil cultists will take the chance to whip 
up trouble and that can only end badly.
3 
 
A horde of orcs and goblins burst from a concealed lair and  
 
Chaos Unleashed
proceeded to slaughter and pillage! Luckily, a regiment of guardsmen 
were nearby and after a pitched ba8le vanquished the evil creatures, 
though many lives were lost. Now people are on edge, wondering 
if this is the first a8ack of many...
4 
 
A famed noblewoman has disappeared in mysterious circumstances.  
Lust for Power
No one knows what has happened, but she was regarded as a skilled 
peacemaker and without her the other nobles are already vying for 
power. Law and order could break down rapidly.
5 
 
A magical portal opens to lands unknown, allowing various foul   
1-3   Fury of the Gods
 
 
creatures to flow through and cause havoc.  These may be mundane  
4-6  Chaos Unleashed
invaders from the distant lands, or could be evil Demons from the 
lowest reaches of the Pit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
A minor noble with a reputation for dark sorceries has made a bid for  
1-3   Lust for Power
power.  This may be a direct a8empt, or they could be using a proxy to  
4-6  Winds of Magic
distract a8ention whilst their foul plans play out in the background. 
 
The next step is to find out what your hero must do to 
tackle the looming threat. Taking your category from 
the table above, roll to see what your first mission is, 
then look at the mission description to see what needs 
to be done. How you go about it is up to you, but be 
aware that completing each mission can earn you the 
chance to strike at your opponent - fight the 
mastermind behind the problem, or if you haven’t 
been able to find them, take on one of their 
henchmen. In addition, you should roll to see who 
your opponent is; right from the start they will be 
aware of your meddling and a8empt to stop you. See 
the descriptions of each villain to see what hindrance 
they put in your way.


--- PAGE 318 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
317
Table 10.2 Combined Mission & Villain by domain
1d6 
Winds of Magic  
Fury of the Gods 
 
Chaos Unleashed 
 
Lust for Power
The winds of magic   The Gods look upon the  
The mighty ba8le drums 
What is life, if not
Swirl and thunder   
mortal plane and grow  
sound out their rhythm 
contest?  And how 
around Titan;anyone   restless, eager to play  
and the dungeons of   
else should we see
who could seizetheir   some part in the drama. 
Titan spew out their  
winners and losers,
power would be 
Becoming their favourite 
foul denizens to unleash 
but by their power?
     mighty indeed. 
will bring great rewards. 
havoc.  
 
 
 
Starting Mission - see section 10.1 for further details
1 
Imps Abound  
Cultists at Large 
 
Creatures of Chaos 
 
Thieves Abound
2 
Flowers of Chaos 
Plague Spreaders 
 
Repel the Invaders 
 
Run the Gauntlet
3 
The Forgo8en Crypt Cruel Cultists  
 
Slouching Beast 
 
Rogue Watchmen
4 
Fonts of Magic 
Cursed Idols  
 
Ogre Stew 
 
 
Slave Takers
5 
Tormenting Mists 
Elemental Fury 
 
Alchemical Arson 
 
Shadow War
6 
Exp. Abberations 
Rediscovered Runes  
Burrowing Worms 
 
Masks of Terror
Opponent - see Chapter 9 for descriptions of each villain
1-2 
The Magician  
The Inquisitor  
 
The Horde 
 
 
The Syndicate
3-4 
The Sorcerer  
The Claws & Thorns  
The Emerald Scale 
 
The Warlord
5-6 
The Coven 
 
The Necromancer 
 
The Nest Mother 
 
The House of Swords
If you manage to complete your mission and defeat 
the mastermind behind it - this may take several 
missions - you can carry on using the tables to find 
more missions and more opponents, until you have 
defeated them all. If you have already defeated an 
opponent or completed a mission you may wish to 
remove them from the list. Section 10.2 provides 
details on how to create your own missions.
There are, of course, innumerable ways in which you 
and your enemy could confront each other and 
having created a map you may have already have 
adventures of your own prepared. The example 
missions are meant to be a broad sample of different 
tasks which require a combination of fighting 
prowess, use of skills, a bit of luck and some 
judgement. Obviously it is impossible to cover all 
types of quest or task, so it will be up to you to read 
through each mission and alter it to suit your needs 
as a hero or Director.
There are some important things to say that relate to 
all of the missions.
• The missions can be failed - this is intentional, if 
a hero is careless or unlucky they might fail in 
their task. Without this element of risk it can easily 
become a treadmill.
• The values for skill tests and monster SKILL and 
STAMINA characteristics are intended to be a 
challenge to a hero built using the standard 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy ruleset, you should 
adjust as required - see Chapter 3 for advice on 
changing difficulty levels.
• Completing a mission might not result in a 
chance to a8ack your opponent; you may need to 
do several to get a chance at defeating them. If this 
option is too slow, you can adjust it so that you 
always end up fighting your opponent at the end 
of each successful mission.


--- PAGE 319 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
318
• It is assumed that whilst you are on a mission, 
you are still making rolls to see if you have 
random encounters, problems with the weather, 
issues with food supply and so on. This helps to 
bring 
your 
world 
to 
life 
and 
is 
highly 
recommended.
Playthrough Example
The human priest, Janay the Just, has arrived in the city of 
Ludria eager to serve Libra, the goddess of Justice. Rolling 
on ‘Table 10.1 Starting Events’ Janay gets a 2, which 
means her starting event is the desecration of a temple part 
of the ‘Fury of the Gods’ domain, which is very appropriate 
for her.
Going to ‘Table 10.2 Combined Mission & Villain by 
domain’ we look at the ‘Fury of the Gods’ column and roll 
for both her first mission and her first opponent. A roll of 5 
tells us that her first mission will be ‘Elemental Fury’ and 
a roll of 6 gives us her opponent - The Necromancer.
At this point we should look through both the details of the 
mission (section 10.1) and the opponent (section 9.1) to 
familiarise ourselves with what Janay needs to do and who 
she is up against. The Elemental Fury mission can be done 
in a city, so Janay can start straight away to ba3le her way 
through the challenges.
At the end of her first mission, although Janay succeeds in 
dealing with the problem, she unfortunately fails the final 
skill test to find out where her opponent is hiding, so she 
ends up fighting a henchman (as her opponent is the 
necromancer Merrick Trench, she fights a ghoul). Still, she 
collects the rewards for her success (see chapter 12 for 
information on rewards such as experience points and 
treasure) and resolves to fight on.
Now we refer to the description of the villain given in 
chapter 9. We roll on his table of motivations to see what 
happens next, ge3ing a 1 we will continue with the ‘Fury 
of the Gods’ missions. This time, rolling on ‘Table 10.1.1 
Campaign Missions’ we get a 1 which is ‘Cultists at 
Large’. If we had rolled a 5 for ‘Elemental Fury’ we could 
choose to play through that mission again or decide to 
reroll and find something new for Janay to do.
We also have to remember that her opponent, the 
necromancer, is now aware that a hero is after them and 
will begin their retaliation, as given in their description (in 
this case it is: Retaliation - The necromancer calls upon the 
spirits of the dead to harass you. Upon defeating an enemy, 
roll a 1d6. On the roll of a 1, it comes back to life as a 
zombie version of itself and a3acks you again! 
The zombie version has its SKILL and STAMINA reduced 
by two compared to the real version. There is no limit on 
how many times each day this can happen. Unnerving!) so 
Janay has to carry out the next mission bearing this in 
mind.
At the end of Cultists at Large Janay does manage to ba3le 
the necromancer, but doesn’t defeat him completely, so we 
go back to his table of motivations and roll again to see 
what he will come up with next. This cycle can be repeated 
until the opponent is defeated, after which a new villain can 
be chosen or rolled for using the same methods.
During all of this Janay is having to deal with normal 
encounters and any additional things she wants to take on. 
She could decide to take a break from fighting the 
necromancer and explore the wilderness, or find a dungeon 
to delve into, or carry on her missions but in a different 
location. 
As with most parts of this book we are giving you a 
framework upon which you can build and we encourage 
you to see our suggestions as starting points rather than 
the finished article.


--- PAGE 320 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
319
10.1 Campaign Missions
In this section we present a number of long missions 
which can be played through to form a campaign or 
included alongside adventures that you have created. 
The missions are designed to include more than just 
combat, with the use of special skills being very 
important and introducing some other ways of 
providing 
a 
challenge 
(collecting 
information, 
fighting a fire, winning a chase and so on). We hope 
that as well as enjoying them they will give you some 
inspiration for pu8ing together your own missions.
At the end of these missions, if your hero is successful 
they will get a chance to strike at their opponent, but 
this is not automatic 
and it is possible to fail 
the 
mission 
or 
to 
succeed but still not 
find the main villain at 
the end of it.
The 
rewards 
for 
success 
and 
consequences of failure 
are 
described 
in 
greater 
detail 
in 
chapter 
12 
but 
in 
addition each of these 
missions has a unique 
reward 
for 
success, 
detailed at the end of 
the description. If you 
are including them as 
part 
of 
your 
own 
campaign you should 
adjust 
the 
rewards 
based on what you 
think is appropriate, 
they are there to give 
you examples of the 
types 
of 
unusual 
rewards a hero can receive for their actions, things 
that are not simply gold, treasure or experience 
points - though your hero should definitely receive 
some experience points for completing these quests 
even if no other rewards are given.
The missions have mostly been designed such that 
they can be played out in more than one type of 
environment (city, dungeon, wilderness) but not all 
of them are universal, so pay a8ention to the 
description before you start them and make sure that 
you are in the right place to undertake the quest. 
Important tip: Whilst we have tried to make the 
mission descriptions as clear and complete as 
possible, there will always be some elements of 
confusion as to exactly 
how it plays out - try to 
play it according to the 
spirit and themes of 
the mission rather than 
ge8ing too caught up 
in 
the 
precise 
mechanics of dice rolls.
Table of Missions
Each of the opponents 
described in chapter 9 
belongs to one domain 
or area of expertise and 
in their descriptions 
you will find a section 
describing motivation, 
including a table to roll 
on. After you have 
worked out what their 
current obsession is, 
you can use ‘Table 
10.1.1 
Campaign 
Missions’ to obtain a 
specific mission or you 
can choose the one you 
feel 
is 
most 
appropriate.  


--- PAGE 321 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
320
Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions 
1d6 
Winds of Magic  
 
Fury of the Gods 
 
Chaos Unleashed 
Lust for Power
The winds of magic swirl  
The Gods look upon the  
The mighty ba8le  
What is life, if not
and thunder around Titan;  mortal plane and grow  
drums sound out  
a competition? And
anyone who could seize  
restless,eager to play some 
their rhythm and 
how else should we
their power would be  
part in the drama.Becoming the dungeons of 
measure winners and 
mighty indeed. 
 
their favourite will bring  
Titan spew out  
losers, but by the
great rewards.  
 
Their foul denizens 
accumulation of
to unleash havoc. 
power.
1 
Imps Abound  
 
Cultists at Large 
 
Creatures of Chaos 
Thieves Abound
2 
Flowers of Chaos 
 
Plague Spreaders 
 
Repel the Invaders 
Run the Gauntlet
3 
The Forgo8en Crypt  
Cruel Cultists  
 
Skulking Beast 
Rogue Watchmen
4 
Fonts of Magic 
 
Cursed Idols  
 
Ogre Stew 
 
Slave Takers
5 
Tormenting Mists 
 
Elemental Fury 
 
Alchemical Arson 
Shadow War
6 
Experimental Abberations 
Rediscovered Runes  
Burrowing Worms 
Masks of Terror
In addition to knowing which mission you are 
undertaking you should also work out who your 
opponent is and where you are starting - it is 
recommended that you start in a city, but you can 
begin in the wilderness or even in a dungeon. If you 
haven’t already worked out where you are, you can 
simply roll 1d6 to find out: 
1-2:  
City
3-4:  
Wilderness
5-6:  
Dungeon
Now you have everything you need to start - a hero, 
an opponent, a place to begin and a quest to 
complete.
List of Campaign Missions
For each mission, a broad description is given 
explaining what your foe is up to and how you can 
combat them. The descriptions are first given for the 
‘city’ environment, and then also for ‘wilderness’ and 
‘dungeon’ se8ings. It is advised to read through the 
whole mission before you start it.
For missions in the city, they are assumed to be 
happening in the city where you are located - you 
won’t have to travel to a new city to complete them! 
For missions in the wilderness, the ‘area’ is located 
3+1d6 areas away in a random direction from your 
home city, as described in the section on generating 
wilderness maps. Dungeons can be located 1d6 areas 
away from your home se8lement in a random 
wilderness area. As usual if you already have specific 
locations and places in mind for your adventures, use 
those. 
Random Location: When a mission says ‘X is in a 
random location’ you should drop or roll a dice onto 
the map to find out where you are going. Inside a 
wilderness 
area, 
a 
‘nearby 
location’ 
means 
somewhere in the same wilderness area and within a 
day's travel as described in the mission details; 
remember to roll for encounters as you move about.
More explanation of how to find random locations, 
areas and rooms is given in section 3.1 ‘Guidance on 
Common Play Situations’.


--- PAGE 322 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
321
Mission 1: Imps Abound
Overview: Vinegar Tom, Rappalskin, Crown Biter, 
Wokka-Kak and Chi8erlips - a variety of fiendish 
imps have been summoned from the depths of hell 
and are creeping, flying and crawling around, 
inflicting wicked curses, stealing, causing food to rot 
and generally causing mayhem. People have become 
suspicious and the cry of ‘Witchcraft!’ is not far from 
their lips. It’s time for you to get into action before the 
mob starts to round up and punish innocent people.
The imps do not stay in one place for long and you 
must search to find them, though they are sneaky and 
cunning prey. Unfortunately, imps are a naturally 
occurring menace on Titan, so you will have to have 
them examined by an expert once you have captured 
them, to see if you have found one that has been 
recently summoned.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Imp Hunter. You must stay alert and be ready 
to dash to where any imps are sighted. 
City: Take your map and roll or drop a dice on it. The 
location it lands nearest too has rumours of an imp 
working its devilry. You should move there and try to 
capture it immediately (within one hour or the imp 
disappears). You may use your Hunting or 
Awareness special skill to look for traces of imp and 
a8empt to grab it. The Second Sight skill, If you have 
it, will add a bonus of +3 to your test as the imps leave 
rather obvious magical trails. If you fail, the imp has 
evaded you and you should try again (use your dice 
to find the next location) - you will hear 1d3 rumours 
of imp a8ack each day. If you succeed you can try 
and defeat the imp and recover its body for 
examination by the scholars. 
Wilderness: It has been noted that a pack of imps are 
plaguing an area of the map. Once you travel there, 
use your Hunting, Region Lore or Second Sight skills 
as described above to find imps. You can make two 
searches per day. 
Dungeon: Imps have been summoned and sca8ered 
around this dungeon, which wouldn’t usually be 
your problem but you are reliably informed that they 
are being taken from here to a nearby se8lement to 
cause havoc. You have been given an imp divining 
rod, which reacts to the nearby presence of a recently 
summoned imp. In each room you can use it - roll 1d6 
- on a roll of six (or 5 & 6 if you have some points in 
the Second Sight skill) you have uncovered an imp 
hiding in the shadows. You must fight it here or 
watch it flee.
Task 2: Injure an Imp. You have spo8ed an imp and 
can leap to a8ack it before it flees. 
Imp 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
7 
MAGIC  
3 
Armour:  
Light 
Weapons:  
Small Claws 
The Imp will a8empt to cast the spell Befuddle and 
will flee if it succeeds. Otherwise, it will fight to the 
death. Should you succeed in vanquishing it, you 
should take the body to the College location for 
examination - identifying an imp will cost 1d6 gold 
pieces. Make a LUCK test (you do not have to deduct 
a point of LUCK regardless of the result) and if 
successful this was a summoned imp, and the 
scholars can try to divine the location of the 
summoner, a process which  involves a lot of innards 
and chanting. You must obtain the bodies of 5 
summoned imps - one for each point of the 
pentagram - to carry out the divination, but there is 
no time limit for this mission The imps are happy to 
stick around and cause mischief as long as they can.


--- PAGE 323 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
322
Once you have the location, drop or roll a dice onto 
your map - where it stops, the nearest place is where 
the summoner is hiding. Move there to confront her!
Wilderness: You have been given a bag of special 
magical powder that will, when sprinkled on an imp, 
determine if it is freshly summoned or just a naturally 
occurring free-range imp. Test your LUCK (do not 
deduct a point of LUCK) to find out. Once you have 
found five imps you can form a pentagram with their 
corpses and use the remainder of the bag of magical 
powder to indicate (in the form of an intense vision) 
where the Foul Summoner is hiding.
Dungeon: Once you have a pile of dead imps (five to 
be exact) you may form a pentagram and use the 
magic of the divining rod to point you towards the 
location of the Foul Summoner, who will be in a 
random room in the next dungeon section.
Task 3: Stop the summoning. Dressed in dark robes, 
barefoot and bare-headed apart from tangled and 
ma8ed hair, the foul summoner has found an 
abandoned hovel (or room in a dungeon) to use for 
her sinister rituals. As you burst in you notice a 
pentagram that has been marked on the floor with 
some kind of dark ink and there is an unhealthy 
amount of candles creating a thick, oily atmosphere. 
With a shriek, the summoner leaps to a8ack you! 
Summoner  
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
MAGIC  
3 
Armour:  
None 
Weapon:  
Dagger
The summoner will a8empt to cast Force Bolt on the 
first round and again after that until they succeed at 
least once, after which they will a8ack wildly at you 
with their dagger. If you should defeat the summoner 
you find her foul scribblings which may or may not 
reveal something about the plans of your opponent. 
To see if it has, close your eyes and roll a dice, saying 
odds or evens as you do so. If you have foretold 
correctly, you earned a chance to strike at your 
opponent. If you are wrong, these are simply the 
rantings of a madwoman. Either way, you believe 
you have found a vital clue. If you were successful in 
your foretelling, you may strike at your opponent, if 
not, you will find only their henchman.
City: drop or roll a dice onto your map and mark the 
nearest location as the place you will find them. 
Wilderness: As above, but the location is a few hours 
of travel away in this area. Dungeon: As above, but if 
the location is a random room in the next section of 
the dungeon - you won’t know if you were successful 
or not until you visit it!
Special Reward for Success: The appearance of imps 
leads to innocent people being accused of witchcraft. 
The next time you are in ‘Slums’ location you will be 
approached by a Hag, who will offer you a wardstone 
- a small stone with runes carved upon it - the next 
time you fight a demon the wardstone will absorb 4 
points of STAMINA damage from any source before 
it’s magic fades.


--- PAGE 324 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
323
Mission 2: Flowers of Chaos
Overview: Reports are coming in of strange, 
mushroom-like stems bursting up from the ground 
overnight and growing to enormous size - well above 
the height of a man - with each one topped by a large 
pod. These plants initially caused much fascination 
and curiosity, with people speculating they may be a 
sign of a good harvest to come or a blessing from the 
gods. That changed when the pods started to open 
and the flowers emerged. Brightly coloured in yellow 
and orange they are certainly a joy to see, but the 
pollen they give off in vast quantities, fogging the air 
around them, has had terrible effects on those that 
inhale it. Some have fallen to the ground and 
sickened, some have been racked by horrible 
coughing fits that last for days and some have been 
sent into a frenzy of violence and madness! Clearly 
this must be stopped.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Flower Finder. You must find and investigate 
some of these mutant flowers. 
City: Each time you have a social encounter, roll using 
the City Lore or Etique8e special skills to find out 
where the most recent ‘flower’ has appeared. As this 
is a topic of much discussion, you have +2 to the skill 
test. Once you have succeeded, take a dice and drop 
or roll it onto your map, the nearest location to where 
it stops is your destination.  
Wilderness: The flowers have been sprouting in great 
numbers across the wilderness, driving people and 
animals into madness. You’ve been sent to deal with 
the problem before it spreads. Choose one of Region 
Lore, Plant Lore or Animal Lore skills to search with 
- you may look as many times in a day as you wish 
until you fail a skill test, after which you have run out 
of clues and must start again the next day.  
Dungeon: You have been informed that the seeds for 
the flowers of chaos are being incubated in this 
dungeon, you must go in and burn them before they 
start sprouting. Each dungeon section has a seed 
growing on top of a large pile of soil in one of the 
rooms (determine randomly) - from the seed there are 
roots spreading through cracks in the rock, heading 
deeper into the dungeon. 
Task 2: Investigate the blooms. Once you find a plant 
you can investigate it. 
City: The large stems seem to be bursting up from 
some place deep in the ground - use your 
Underground Lore or Magic Lore special skill to 
work out where these stems are coming from. If you 
fail, you must find another plant to study. You will 
need to repeat Task 1 again until you have succeeded 
3 times, in order to gain enough information about 
where the plants are coming from. At that point you 
realise that the strange flowers are coming from a 
source deep in one of the catacombs that riddle the 
ground underneath the city - drop or roll a dice on 
your map to find out where.
Wilderness: Use Region Lore or Magic Lore to 
examine the plants, needing three successes to find 
the main root. The catacomb is located very close by 
(thirty minute search to find the entrance). 
Dungeon: Once you have found three seeds, the next 
section of the dungeon will contain the main root 
chamber as described below.


--- PAGE 325 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
324
Task 3: The catacomb (City & Wilderness only). You 
have found a catacomb, generate a map using the 
usual method described in encounter M4 but with 
two modifications. Firstly, the catacomb condition is 
‘slimy’ - there is a lot of moisture in the air here and 
tendrils and vines hang down thickly, it is like 
wading through a swamp. Secondly, for each room 
you enter roll 1d6. On a roll of 1 or 2 there is a Leaf 
Beast concealed here (see the Leaf Beast encounter 
C22 for description) which is in addition to any other 
monsters you may meet. The Root chamber you are 
searching for will be connected to the final room of 
the Catacomb (of course) so you will need to clear the 
whole place before entering it.
Task 4: The Root Chamber.  The floor of this chamber 
is covered in large (waist high) mushrooms but most 
of the space is taken up by a dense, kno8ed mass of 
roots that originate from an enormous seed pod - 
about as long as a man - then lead upward from the 
pod and through the roof and walls. The pod and its 
tendrils glow with a sickly green light and you can 
see it pulsing slowly like the heartbeat of some giant 
creature. As you look around a figure comes bursting 
out from its hiding spot amongst the roots and 
confronts you. It is clear you must fight them if you 
wish to destroy the seed!
Spore Man  
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10  
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapons:  
Club (A8acks: 2, see below).
At first this seems to be just a large man dressed in 
rough furs, but as they approach in the dim light you 
see that they have been infested with a terrible 
disease that has caused mushrooms to burst out and 
grow across their skin! Their eyes gleam with a wild 
madness and as they lurch towards you spores burst 
from them with each shuddering step they take. 
As the spore man fights he will reach down, grab a 
mushroom spore sac from the ground and hurl it at 
you. In addition to the normal a8ack, the Spore Man 
makes a thrown weapon a8ack with the spore sac. If 
it hits, roll 1d6 for the effect: 1-2 - choking spores - you 
cough and splu8er on the dry spores, causing a -2 
penalty to any use of your Magic skill. 3-4 - blinding 
spores - itchy, rough spores make your eyes water 
and blink - suffer a -2 penalty to your SKILL for one 
round 5-6 - burning spores - acidic spores burn into 
your skin, causing 2 points of STAMINA damage.
Should you defeat the Spore Man, you can set about 
destroying the seed pod and clearing the chamber, 
most easily by using a torch to set fire to it. Whilst 
doing this you can search for clues about who set this 
terror in motion. Pick two skills from Awareness, 
Hunting, Underground Lore and Magic Lore, and 
make two rolls. Add together all the results - if you 
get more than 25 in total (both special skill values 
plus your two rolls, so skill + skill + 4d6) you have 
discovered a secret passageway that leads to 
somewhere interesting..you follow it to Strike at your 
Opponent. If you do not get enough, the trail has run 
cold and whilst you have succeeded in this mission 
you need to start another to continue ba8ling your 
foe. 
Special Reward for Success: Unbeknownst to you a 
Herbalist was also studying these strange plants and 
has followed you into the root chamber to collect 
samples. She lives in the nearest city and when you 
are in that se8lement you may visit her to gain +2 
bonus to any tests of your Plant Lore or related skill 
tests.


--- PAGE 326 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
325
Mission 3: The Forgo=en Crypt
Overview: Rumours have come to your ears of a 
forgo8en crypt, said to contain unusual and powerful 
magic. The existence of this crypt has long been a 
local legend and many tales are told about its 
whereabouts, contents and the several devious and 
deadly traps that protect it. Now you believe your 
opponent has unearthed some more concrete 
information about its location. You must do your best 
to beat them to it, lest the stories are true and they 
gain some unspeakable ancient power.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Intercept the Investigators. You have heard 
that investigators have been hired and your task is to 
intercept them and find out what they know. 
City: Each social encounter, roll an Etique8e test, 
asking if they have seen anyone excavating 
suspiciously. Each time you succeed, drop or roll a 
dice onto your map to find out where this happened. 
Once there make an Awareness or Underground Lore 
skill roll to see if you can find them. If you fail, you 
have blundered into a trap! They have dug out a pit 
and covered it, filling the bo8om with sharp rubble. 
You must test against LUCK or the Trap Knowledge 
special skill or fall in and suffer 1d6 points of 
STAMINA damage. Climbing out is not hard, just 
embarrassing. If you pass the Awareness test you do 
spot the Shady Excavator and can confront them. 
Wilderness: In the wilderness area you must search 
out recent excavations. Use Underground Lore or 
Region Lore to spot them; you can take the test twice 
a day (don’t forget random encounters). If you fail, 
you have blundered into a trap - use Awareness or 
Trap Knowledge to avoid the pit trap or suffer 1d6 
points of damage. If you succeed you catch a Shady 
Excavator at work. 
Dungeon: Once you create a dungeon section, mark 
two rooms as ‘excavators’ - when you reach these 
rooms, roll against Underground Lore or Trap 
Knowledge. If you fail the test they are alerted to your 
approach and have left a trap (as described in the city 
mission) but if you pass the test you disturb a Shady 
Excavator at work and can fight them.
Task 2: Fight the Excavator. 
Shady Excavator 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
9 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
Weapon:  
Pickaxe. 
Nearby you can hear the clink-clink of someone 
digging. Moving quietly forward you see a dwarf, 
mu8ering to themselves as they hack away at the 
ground. As soon as he notices you he looks up and 
grins evilly. It looks like they are in no mood to talk.
Should you defeat them you can recover their notes 
(a rough map and directions about where to dig)  and 
try to work out the location of the crypt. Make a skill 
roll (City Lore, Region Lore or Underground Lore 
depending on where you are adventuring) with a 
target number of 20! If you fail, you must repeat the 
steps above to gain more notes from different 
excavators. Each set of notes you recover after the 
first grants you a cumulative +3 bonus to your roll 
(but only to find the location of the crypt, not for 
other tests).
Once you succeed it's time to move to the crypt 
location. 
City: drop or roll a dice onto your map to find out 
where the crypt is to be found - it is located at the 
Temple location which is closest to where your dice 
ends up. 


--- PAGE 327 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
326
Wilderness: The crypt is hidden by the corner of a 
ruined temple you spo8ed earlier. Slightly annoyed, 
go there and see if you can deal with it - the lair of 
your opponent will be somewhere close by. 
Dungeon: The forgo8en crypt is concealed in the next 
dungeon section (replace a random room with the 
crypt, which is hidden behind a secret door that the 
excavators notes described). If you survive to find 
your opponent's lair, it will be hidden somewhere in 
the same section of the dungeon as the crypt.
Task 3: The Forgo8en Crypt. The tales of this crypt 
had provided several locations, but the key to finding 
it is a description of the disguised entrance. With the 
notes you have recovered from the excavators you 
understand exactly where to look - a particular 
statue, in a quiet corner, with a worn inscription 
across the base. As the instructions indicate you place 
your weight against the entrance and heave. For a 
moment nothing happens and you think you have 
made a mistake, then the grime and dust of ages gives 
way and the obstruction slides across revealing a set 
of steps going down sharply into the darkness. 
Lighting your torch, you head down.
The air of the crypt is cold and dry and the dust on 
the floor is undisturbed. The steps go down a short 
way then open out into a small room, 15’ by 15’, in 
which the only object is a large casket against the far 
wall. You are about to step forward when...roll an 
Awareness test with a -2 penalty or a Trap 
Knowledge test with a bonus of +2 (pick one only) as 
a blade scythes out from the wall and tries to chop 
you in half! If you succeed you have dodged it, if you 
fail, take 1d6 points of STAMINA damage.
Once you have recovered, you can move to open the 
casket. This time you check it carefully for traps, but 
find none, so you heave against the lid and slide it 
open. As the stone crashes to the ground you are 
startled to see the skeleton inside is rising up, sword 
in hand, to a8ack you! 
Ancient Skeleton  
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
12 
Armour:  
Chainmail Hauberk. 
Weapon:  
Sword. 
Should you defeat the skeleton you can search the 
casket, retrieving 3 stone tablets carved with ancient 
runes. You conclude that these must be the objects 
your opponent was seeking. After you leave the 
spooky crypt (carefully stepping past the trap) you sit 
down to examine them. Can you decipher them? 
Firstly, roll 1d6 and record the number. Now make a 
Magic Lore special skill roll. If you aren’t confident in 
your Magic Lore skill you may test your LUCK 
instead, to see if you have by chance seen similar 
runes in the past. Should you succeed, roll a 1d6+1 
and compare it to the number you first rolled, adding 
your points in Magic Lore special skill to the result. If 
the second total is more than your first roll, you have 
successfully interpreted the runes and understand 
what your opponent was up to. You may strike at 
your opponent - If you fail, you still think you have 
understood, but you will only find a henchman, 
though you can consider this mission completed 
either way.
In the City your opponent will be nearby, in the same 
location awaiting the tablets. In the Wilderness they 
will be within an hour’s walk from the ruins and in a 
Dungeon they will be in a random room in the same 
section as the crypt (if you have already fully 
explored this section, create another one to house 
them).
Special Reward for Success: The stone tablets may be 
of interest to sages and scholars; the next time you are 
in a se8lement with a College location you can offer 
them for sale. In return they will either answer one 
question of Lore for you, identify a magical item or 
give you 4d6gp. The tablets take up one inventory 
slot.


--- PAGE 328 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
327
Mission 4: Fonts of Magic
Overview: Magic swirls and eddies around Titan like 
an invisible flow of water. Slow and deep in some 
places, fast and bubbling in others. In very special 
cases wild magic bursts out in such force that strange 
events happen spontaneously. Magical creatures 
arrive to feed off the energy, enchanters try to trap it 
in odd machinery of their own devising. 
Note: As this mission plays out differently depending 
on where it occurs, the description for wilderness and 
dungeon are given at the end - please read the full 
description first.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
These events have caused quite a stir in the city and 
crowds have gathered to watch the strange glowing 
streams of energy snake up from the ground, whilst 
the Watch try to hold them back - touching raw magic 
can have unpredictable effects. After a few days of 
excitement, something terrible happens. A mage was 
trying to measure the magical flux at one of the fonts 
when a strange creature, shaped like a small man 
made out of kno8ed thorn bush branches, appeared  
and jumped into the centre of the flow. Within 
moments it became frantic, thrashing its thorn laden 
arms about, before leaping out and slashing at the 
mage and some standers-by, wounding them 
severely. It then ran-tumbled away through the 
panicking crowds and off to parts unknown. The next 
day the same thing happened again at another font, 
and now it is time for you to investigate.
Task 1: Monitor a Font. Each day 1d6 fonts of magic 
erupt in the city. Roll that number of dice onto your 
map and note the locations of the fonts for that day. 
You must choose one for a stake-out. Move there and 
wait for 1d6 hours (depending on timing, you may be 
able to monitor more than one each day).
The Bramble-sprite appears and acts very suddenly - 
make an Awareness skill roll to see if you are paying 
a8ention. If you fail the roll, you start your pursuit 
one round behind it.
The li8le creature seems very intent on going 
somewhere so you decide to follow it (if you wish to 
a8ack it instead, it has 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
9 
Armour:  
Dodge skill 5
It will not a8empt to fight you but simply whip about 
in a frenzy trying to escape). Now you must enter a 
foot race with it, as it bounds and tumbles through 
the city, slashing people with its razor sharp thorns as 
it goes. Make an opposed Acrobatics or SKILL test 
against the Bramble-sprite each round of running - if 
you win you keep up with it (or gain on it if you are 
behind). If you lose it dashes away - if it gets 3 rounds 
ahead of you, it has escaped into the crowd and you 
must start again. 
Running through each location you must roll for 
encounters, but you don’t have time to interact with 
them if you want to keep up - so you must decide if 
you can escape from each encounter without slowing 
down. Each location you go through takes 1d6 
rounds of dashing. Start by rolling 1d6 to see which 
way it is going (1 - North, 2 - East, 3- South, 4-West, 
5-6 roll again - if you come to a city wall then roll to 
see if it turns left or right). It will dash through four 
locations in total. If you are still in touch with it, you 
see it turn down a couple of quieter alleys before it 
suddenly leaps through an open window into a small 
workshop. 
As you arrive, breathless, the shu8ers on the window 
slam closed. You quiet your breathing and look 
through the gaps of the shu8ers. Inside you see a 
small man, wearing grey robes and a cloth hat si8ing 
at a work table that has a large bronze bowl on it. The 


--- PAGE 329 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
328
Bramble-sprite leaps onto the table, jumps into the 
bowl and sits down. The man u8ers a short chant and 
the creature starts to shrink down and shrivel, curling 
up until, with a brief flash of blue light, it transforms 
into a small ball of wood, rolling around in the bowl. 
The man lets out a noise of satisfaction and picks up 
the ball, placing it into a leather satchel that was lying 
next to the bowl.  At this point you can choose to 
either confront the enchanter immediately and bring 
an end to his scheme or try to find out what he is 
doing. If you wish to confront him, you can burst into 
the workshop and have at him.
Task 2: Confront the Enchanter. 
Enchanter 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
9 
Arcane Power  5 
Weapon:  
Dagger 
Armour:  
None. 
On the first round the enchanter will a8empt to cast 
Flash! and after that he will a8empt to cast Levitate, 
at which point he will float up, out of the window, 
and pull his cloak wide like a pair of wings to float 
away on the breeze, never to be seen again! If he 
escapes (or you kill him) this mission is completed, 
but you don’t get a chance to strike at your opponent.
If you prefer, you find a place to hide and wait to see 
what happens. After 1d6 hours a rough looking man 
approaches the door, knocks a few times and speaks 
some muffled code word. The door is opened a 
fraction and the leather satchel passed out to the man, 
who tucks it into their clothing and hurries off. As 
you chased the Bramble-sprite before, you must now 
follow this man, though at a slower pace.
The satchel carrier travels through 1d6 locations 
before they arrive at their destination. Use the same 
method as before (from where you start, 
1 - North
2 - East
3-  South
4-  West
5-6 roll again - if you come to a city wall then roll 
to see if he turns left or right). 
Trailing him requires some subtlety - make an 
opposed test against his Awareness skill of 5 - you 
may use either your Disguise or Sneaking skill. If he 
succeeds twice, he has noticed you and will turn and 
fight you!
Satchel Carrier 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
7 
Weapon:  
Dagger 
Armour:  
None
If you defeat him you can recover the satchel with its 
strange magical wooden ball, worth 2d6 gp, but the 
trail of your opponent runs cold. The mission is 
completed.
If you succeed in trailing him he eventually comes to 
another quiet alleyway, where he knocks on a door 
and passes the satchel inside when it opens - but is it 
your opponent or a henchman that awaits? 
The door is in a windowless dwelling, you may 
prepare yourself before bursting in (surprisingly it 
isn’t locked) - now you must roll against your LUCK. 
If you are lucky, you get to strike at your opponent, if 
not it is, disappointingly, merely a henchman. Either 
way this mission is at an end.
Wilderness: Reports have come in that an area of the 
wilderness is experiencing strange surges of magic 
that are disturbing the natural order - you have been 
sent to investigate. First, you must test your 
Awareness or Region Lore skills to find one of the 
magical fonts whilst it is still active. You may roll 
twice per day. 


--- PAGE 330 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
329
Once you find one, wait 1d6 hours until a Bramble-
sprite appears to ‘harvest’ the magic. When you 
disturb it, the li8le creature will pinwheel away 
trying to flee from you. To follow it you must use 
your Running or Ride skill as the sprite jinks and 
dashes in a crazy path. It has SKILL 7 and you must 
make five opposed tests against it - if you succeed in 
three you have kept pace with it, but if it wins three 
times it has go8en away and you must search for 
another font of magic. 
If you keep up, the encounter proceeds as described 
for the city, with the enchanter occupying a camp or 
abandoned shack. If you wait for the satchel carrier, 
you must use your Sneak skill vs his Awareness to tail 
him successfully. Again, make five contested rolls - 
you will need to win at least three to succeed. If you 
fail, he has slipped away from you and you must start 
again at the enchanter’s camp.
Dungeon: Magic is welling up from the depths and 
emerging in this dungeon. It’s a resource which can’t 
be left in the hands of evil. 
When you create a dungeon section, randomly assign 
two rooms in the section as fonts of magic. You can’t 
afford to wait around for a Bramble-sprite to appear, 
so you’ll have to rely on luck - in each room with a 
magic font roll 1d6. On a 5 or 6 you interrupt a sprite 
harvesting magic. 
Chasing it through a dungeon could well be suicide, 
so instead you must use Underground Lore, 
Awareness or Hunting to track it through the 
dungeon as you work your way through - make a test 
in each new room you enter (this can end up being 
split over more than one dungeon section). You need 
to succeed seven times to discover the location of the 
enchanter - he is located behind a secret door 
(actually an illusionary wall) in the room where you 
make your last successful skill roll. 
Unlike the city mission, there is no satchel 
carrier - instead when you threaten the 
enchanter he reveals the lair of your 
opponent, which is a randomly chosen 
room in the next dungeon section, but 
when you get there you must still test 
against your LUCK to find out if you are 
facing your opponent or a henchman.
Special Reward for Success: Your work 
has pleased the wizards; if you are a 
wizard they offer to teach you one spell 
(you may learn a spell, with the usual 
restrictions 
but 
without 
spending 
experience). 
If you are not a wizard they offer you a 
special scroll of Levitate - it works as per 
the Wizardry spell, has two uses and does 
not require Magic Lore to use.


--- PAGE 331 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
330
Mission 5: Tormenting Mists
Overview: Seemingly out of nowhere, strange 
patches of dense, choking mist have been springing 
up seemingly at random. This would be disturbing 
enough on its own but terrible things happen to 
people unlucky enough to be caught inside it. Some 
go missing, vanishing as if they had been snatched 
into the sky, some are found mad and raving and 
some are found dead, horribly mutilated. The mists 
disappear as quickly as they form, leaving the people 
fearful and perplexed. Clearly a hero is needed to 
investigate and bring this problem to an end.
The mists are the result of a magical experiment in 
which enchanted braziers are filled with an incense 
that is the result of lengthy rituals, before being 
discreetly activated where they will cause maximum 
damage. The incense and the braziers are eventually 
consumed by the magic, leaving behind only a small 
pile of grey ash and twisted metal.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1. Enter the Mists. You must travel to where the 
mists have formed and enter them, looking to survive 
long enough to find the brazier and extinguish it, so 
the remains can be studied to work out who is 
building these terrifying magical contraptions. Only 
one mist will appear each day, around dusk. 
City: Drop or roll a dice onto your map to find out 
which location is affected by a mist. When you move 
to the location you will find that people are fleeing in 
fear, so whilst you have to roll encounters en route, 
you don’t have to roll an encounter for the affected 
location. You can then enter the mists and explore 
(see below). 
Wilderness: Searching around the area for signs of 
violence, use your Region Lore or Awareness skill to 
find a patch of mist - you may do this once a day, at 
dusk. 
Dungeon: One brazier has been placed in each 
dungeon section, filling it with swirling mists - 
instead of rolling each round for effects, roll each time 
you enter a new room. Frustratingly, the monsters in 
this dungeon are unaffected by the mists.  The 
braziers seem to come in three kinds, which each 
pose a different challenge. Each time you enter you 
must roll to see what the challenge is.
1d6 
Type of Mist 
Effect
1-2 
Freezing Mist The mist is bright white, almost painful to look at, but as soon as you enter you find 
yourself chilled to the bone, causing a -1 penalty to your movement skills whilst inside it. 
There is an eerie silence - except from a low growling that seems to come from right beside 
you! Each round you are in this mist, roll 1d6. On a 1 or 2 a spectral Yeti looms up in front 
of you breathing out a freezing cloud of ice and sleet. You suffer 2 points of damage (no 
Armour roll) unless you test either your LUCK or your Dodging skill to dive out of the 
way. The Yeti cannot be a8acked, destroyed or hidden from.
3-4 
Toxic Mist 
This mist is tinged with sickly greens and blues and inhaling it makes you feel nauseous. 
Each round test against STAMINA by rolling 3d6 - if you fail the test you vomit profusely 
and temporarily lose one point of SKILL. If your SKILL falls to zero you have fallen 
unconscious...test against your LUCK. If you succeed the mists retreat soon after and you 
slowly come to your senses. If you fail, your body succumbs to the toxins and you die.


--- PAGE 332 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
331
City/Wilderness: Once you enter the mist, the aim is to 
head to the centre and find out what is causing it. The 
mist is very disorientating, so you must make an 
Awareness or Hunting test (you decide) each round 
to see if you can make your way without ge8ing lost. 
You must succeed 6 times in total to get to the centre 
and find the magical brazier (so you could make ten 
a8empts, failing four and succeeding six times). 
Dungeon: The brazier is in a random room of each 
dungeon section.
When you get there you see a large brass brazier 
filled with glowing incense - the mist is streaming out 
from its top like water from a pipe. You quickly knock 
it over to extinguish the incense and bring an end to 
the spell. The mists vanish as quickly as they arrived. 
The parts of the brazier that haven’t been consumed 
by the magic can be scooped up and studied.
Task 2: Identify the Crafter. Once you have some 
parts, you can try and find out who is making them. 
City: Go to the Marketplace location where you can 
ask around the merchants to see if they recognise the 
workmanship. Make a Bargain skill roll with a target 
number of 20. Each time you recover more pieces of 
brazier (by entering a new mist the next day) you get 
a bonus of +3 to your roll - so by the time you have 
entered (and survived) the mists 3 times you would 
roll with a +6 bonus.
Once successful, you have found a merchant that 
recognises the workmanship and can tell you where 
the workshop that makes them is. Drop or roll a dice 
onto your map to find the location of the workshop. 
Wilderness: Once you find a mist, use the rules above 
for entering it and finding the brazier at the centre. 
The locations of the braziers suggest that their maker 
must be somewhere nearby (within an hour's travel); 
make a Region Lore or Crafting skill test with a target 
of 20 as you try to figure it out, gaining +3 to your roll 
for each brazier you recover.  Dungeon: When you 
recover pieces of the brazier, make an Underground 
Lore, Trap Knowledge or Crafting roll with a target 
number of 20 to see if you have worked out what they 
are; add +3 to your test for each brazier you recover. 
When you have succeeded in the roll, the next 
dungeon section will contain the workshop (pick a 
random room).
Task 3: The Workshop. When you arrive at the 
workshop you have the option of either trying to hide 
and wait it out or blunder in and rely on luck. If you 
wish to simply charge in, test your LUCK. If you are 
lucky you have arrived at the right time and can 
strike at your opponent. If you are unlucky, the only 
person there is a twisted metalworker that has been 
driven to madness by making these artefacts - or 
perhaps it was their crazed mind that showed them 
how to do it in the first place. Either way they will 
a8ack you as soon as you enter.
5-6 
Wailing Mist The mist is thick and filled with dark whirling tendrils so the world is seen as if through 
a veil. Worst of all there is a low wailing that rises and falls. Entering the mist fills you 
with dread, causing a -1 penalty to all Knowledge skill rolls and Magic tests (including 
spellcasting). The second round after entering the mist you will be a8acked by a knife 
wielding apparition - it looks like the spirit of a noble man, dressed in fine clothing but 
with an u8erly demented expression. The spirit cannot be damaged - it has SKILL 7 and 
will a8ack for four rounds before flying off to another part of the mist in search of other 
victims. After that, roll 1d6 for each round you are in the mist - on a roll of a 1 it swoops 
back to a8ack for another round.  Each time it hits, its spectral knife inflicts 2 points of 
STAMINA damage which is not stopped by any kind of armour. The spirit cannot be 
a8acked, destroyed or hidden from.


--- PAGE 333 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
332
Twisted Metalworker 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Armour:  
Light. 
Weapon:  
Hammer. 
Wearing a leather apron festooned with tools of all 
types, this man seems to have inhaled a few too many 
lead fumes over the years. They are slobbering and 
mu8ering, sketching out strange 
designs in their mind even as they 
pick up the nearest heavy tool and 
a8ack you. 
Their hammer is burning hot from 
the forge and if they hit you suffer 
one additional point of heat damage. 
Once you have defeated them, there 
is no-one else that can make the 
braziers 
and 
the 
mission 
is 
completed.
If you prefer you can try and stake-
out the workshop. You find a 
shadowed spot and wait - make three 
Sneaking skill rolls. If you succeed 
with all three rolls you hang around 
long enough for your opponent to 
turn up, though you must fight them 
and 
the 
Twisted 
Metalworker 
together. 
If you fail any of the rolls, the 
Twisted Metalworker spots you and 
sneaks away out the back - the 
mission is failed!
Special Reward for Success: Although the pieces of 
the brazier are beaten and smashed they still retain a 
faint magic. Once you return to a se8lement you can 
have them forged into a torc (metal neck ring) that 
protects against poison gas. Whilst wearing it you 
gain +3 to resist the effects of any noxious gas. 
Forging the torc costs you 3d6gp and takes one week.


--- PAGE 334 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
333
Mission 6: Experimental Aberrations
Overview: The power of magic is seductive and 
many have drifted into madness in pursuit of it. Some 
dabblers a8empt to twist and reshape life into new 
forms; this type of magic is incredibly hard to master 
and usually results in short lived and violent 
creatures, their minds filled with rage and pain. 
Unfortunately the person responsible in this case is 
unleashing his creations which are inflicting carnage 
before they expire, exhausted by their own manic 
spite. Obviously the appearance of these misshapen 
beasts - they are roughly dog sized amalgamations of 
several different species - causes a great panic and 
hullabaloo as people run screaming from their 
a8acks, calling for a hero to come and save them.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Hunt an Aberration. Should you wish to be 
the hero, the first step is to find some beasts. 
City: In every location you can try to catch the trail. 
You need an Awareness, Hunting, Animal Lore skill 
roll. If you succeed you can leap forward, sword (or 
spell) in hand to deal with it...but what will you be 
facing? 
Wilderness: An area of the wilderness is infested with 
hideous mutant beasts that a8ack on sight - clearly 
something is going on that requires a brave hero to 
remedy it. Once arrived, you can use Hunting, 
Animal Lore or Awareness to track the beasts. You 
can look up to three times each day to find one. 
Dungeon: A fiend has constructed a laboratory in this 
dungeon and his aberrations keep escaping to a8ack 
nearby se8lements - it’s time you dealt with it. As you 
enter each room in this dungeon, roll 1d6 - on a roll of 
1 the room also includes an aberration (see table) 
which you must fight alongside anything else.
1d6 
Type of Aberration 
Description
1-2 
Screeching Beak-Face Mostly a large flightless bird combined with four reptilian legs and a dogs tail the 
Screeching Beak-Face leaps to peck at you savagely whilst emi8ing a deafening 
series of squawks. 
SKILL 7 STAMINA 6 Weapon: Small Claw Armour: Light. 
The squawking is so unse8ling that it causes a -1 penalty to all spellcasting rolls. 
3-4 
Jumping Crab  
With a beetle’s body and head, powerful cat-like hind legs and two oversized 
crabs claws, the Jumping Crab will leap at you and a8empt to pinch off bits of 
flesh. 
SKILL 6 STAMINA 8 Weapon: Large Claw Armour: Medium. 
If the Jumping Crab hits with an a8ack, it will automatically do 2 points of 
STAMINA damage the next round as it tears at your flesh! You must win a round 
of combat against it to dislodge it.
5-6 
Claw Ball 
 
A whirling ball of fur, teeth and many many claws confronts you. The Claw Ball 
spins into a8ack like a dervish, trying to rip you to shreds. 
SKILL 6 STAMINA 6 Weapon: Small Claw Armour: Dodge Skill 3. 
The Claw Ball has so many claws that it makes two combat rolls each round and 
uses the highest!


--- PAGE 335 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
334
Once you defeat the creature you are left trying to 
discern where it came from. Fortunately, help is at 
hand. A scholar has offered to examine the beasts, for 
free, to see if she can work out who is making them. 
City: She lives in a house at the College location - take 
the body of the beast to her where she can use it to 
a8empt a scrying ritual. The scrying ritual is not 
certain - roll 2d6. If the total is 10 or more she has 
succeeded in finding the location of the laboratory. If 
you have a MAGIC characteristic of one or more you 
may add +1 to the roll. Each beast you bring her adds 
another one to the roll, but only if supplied within 
one day. Once the scholar has succeeded she tells you 
the location of the lab - drop or roll a dice onto your 
map and look for the nearest Slum Alley, Garbage 
Heap, Park or Graveyard to see where you are going.
Wilderness: The elderly scholar capable of using the 
corpses for a scrying ritual (see above) has already 
travelled to the area and made a camp here; you don’t 
need to go back to the city. After that, the mission 
proceeds as described for the city, except that the 
locations of your opponent are all in this area. 
Dungeon: There is no time to take the corpses back to 
town, so keep ploughing on until you have five of 
them. After that the sixth ‘beast’ will be the Crazed 
Researcher. Should you defeat him, use the same 
mechanism to see if you can locate your opponent, 
who is lurking in a random room of the next section.
Task 2: The Laboratory. Knowing what you are 
looking for, it is relatively easy to identify the 
laboratory - an unadorned wooden building (or 
partitioned off part of room in a dungeon), no larger 
than a shack, which is distinguished by its lack of 
windows, the strange squeaking noises coming from 
inside and the musty smell of burning flesh that gets 
stronger as you approach. A simple wooden door, 
unbarred, faces you. Bursting (or sneaking) in you 
find a scene of horror. Cages li8er the floor and fill up 
wooden shelves, containing all manner of sickly 
looking animals. At the far end of the shack, lit by 
torchlight, you see a wide low table covered in animal 
parts & cu8ing implements. Standing at the table 
dressed in a butcher's apron is a skinny man holding 
down a quivering creature as he tries to stitch a new 
limb onto it - he spins around as you enter and, 
grabbing a bloodied cleaver, rushes at you. 
Crazed Researcher 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Weapon: Handaxe 
Armour: Leather Hauberk. 
As you fight, there is a chance that you will crash into 
a cage and release one of the starving beasts. If you 
draw a round, your tussle has broken open a cage 
and something will leap out and bite you for 1d3 
points of damage before it seizes its chance to escape.
Should you win, searching the shack reveals their lab 
notes, detailing when and where they are to be paid. 
The writing is not in the common tongue - you must 
make a Languages skill roll or a test of LUCK to 
interpret it. If you succeed you may strike at your 
opponent when you get to the meeting point. If you 
fail the roll you have got the timing wrong and when 
you get to the location, you only find a henchman. 
City: The meeting point is at the nearest city gate. 
Wilderness: The meeting point is about an hour walk. 
Dungeon: The meeting point is at the end of the 
current dungeon section (and includes a secret 
passage that leads back to the surface).
Special Reward for Success: Whilst at the laboratory 
you find a small clump of furs, eyes and claws that 
seems to be far less aggressive. If you wish you can 
take this beast and train it. It requires one meal every 
two days, it does not fight (Furball SKILL 4 
STAMINA 4) but is very alert, providing you with a 
+1 bonus to Awareness skill tests to spot anyone 
sneaking up on you. You may name it as you wish.


--- PAGE 336 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
335
Mission 7: Cultists at Large
Overview: Cultists of the evil gods have infiltrated 
this place. They came in secret and whispered dark 
and terrible thoughts into the ears of those 
downtrodden and miserable people who will listen to 
their promises of power. They hope to convert 
enough people that they can come out into the open 
and make this place a home for their corrupted gods. 
You must find them and destroy them. Each time you 
defeat a cultist, you gather some scraps of 
information that might lead you to the location of 
your opponent.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Find the Cultists. Your first job is to try and 
find some cultists. 
City: The cultists hide in plain sight and only careful 
observation will reveal them. When you have a Social 
encounter you can make a Religion Lore skill roll to 
interrogate them about the existence of a cult. If you 
succeed, you have unearthed the identity of a cultist 
nearby at this location and can unmask them! (You 
can also carry out the normal social interactions you 
would have with this person - the information about 
cultists is in addition to that).
Wilderness: A cult has set up a temple or base in the 
designated area, you must traverse it to find 
se8lements or homesteads where you can interrogate 
people. On each day spent in the area make two 
Region Lore skill tests; if you succeed you have found 
someone to talk to. Make a Religion Lore skill test - if 
you succeed you have unmasked a hidden cultist and 
can fight them. Use the rules below to see if you can 
uncover their leader. The hidden cultist priest will be 
in the same area. If you find a se8lement in the area 
you can search there for cultists just as you would in 
a city.
Dungeon: In each section replace two of the monsters 
in each section with a cultist; once you have identified 
the hidden cultist priest (see the rules below) they 
will be in the next section you generate.
Task 2: Fight the Hidden Cultist. Having located a 
cultist, you can now fight them. 
Hidden Cultist 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Dagger 
Armour:  
None. 
Once revealed by your investigation, the cultist will 
fight with a wild frenzy whilst screaming curses and 
accusations at you. Devotion to their cause makes 
them immune from spells and effects which cause 
fear or charm. As you fight the cultist they promise 
retribution from their leader whenever you hurt 
them. Each time you cause STAMINA damage to the 
Hidden Cultist they might reveal a piece of 
information - make a Religion Lore skill roll. If you 
succeed they have unwi8ingly helped you identify 
their leader - after each fight in which you receive a 
clue roll 1d6. 
On a result of six you have pieced together the clues 
and identified the cultist leader. If not, you need to 
find another cultist to see if they have be8er 
information and repeat the process. For every three 
cultists you defeat, the number you need to roll on 
1d6 comes down by one - so after the sixth cultist, you 
need to roll a 4, 5 or 6 to understand where their 
priest is hiding.
Once you succeed, you have a location. City: drop or 
roll a dice onto the map to discover where the head 
priest is. Wilderness: The priest is in the same area 
and it will take half a day to get to his precise location. 
Dungeon: The priest will be in a random room of the 
next section you create. 


--- PAGE 337 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
336
He is not openly parading about as the head of a cult 
so will appear to be just an ordinary citizen - a tailor 
perhaps, or a humble labourer. Nevertheless his 
arrogance is such that once you confront him he will 
make no a8empt to hide!
Task 3: Confront the Priest. 
Hidden Cultist Priest 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Devotion  
4 
Weapon:  
Short Sword 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
The priest uses the power ‘Ill Luck’ on the 
first round then a8acks. He also has the 
power of ‘Smite’ against good aligned 
creatures such as most heroes. He is also 
immune to spells and effects which cause 
fear or charm. Once defeated you can 
take his notebook which describes when 
and where he meets your opponent to 
receive his orders. 
Task 4: Stakeout. You must hide at a 
location and wait for your opponent. 
City: Drop or roll a dice onto your map 
and note the nearest City Gate location. 
You must stake out this location and do 
so at night (adjust your encounters 
accordingly).  
Wilderness: you are directed to a campsite 
in this area that you must stake out at 
night (don’t forget to roll for encounters). 
Dungeon: You find a map to a chamber 
hidden behind a secret door in this 
dungeon section (add one to a random 
room) which you must watch for 1d6 
hours - remember to roll for random 
encounters. Wherever you are, once in place make a 
Sneaking skill roll - if you succeed you can strike at 
your opponent - if you fail, you have been spo8ed 
and they send a henchman instead.
Special Reward for Success: Defeating the plans of 
evil cultists earns you the favour of the gods of good; 
you restore one point of temporary LUCK.


--- PAGE 338 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
337
Mission 8: Plague Spreaders
Overview: In an a8empt to weaken the city, your 
opponent has unleashed a hideous disease upon it 
which has spread very quickly. Fear runs through the 
se8lement; pitchers of sulphur are burnt in the open 
and priests and black clad plague doctors roam the 
streets, offering help - or perhaps helping to spread 
the infection. It’s impossible to tell, especially with so 
many people going about masked. Herbalists are 
dispatched to the wilds to find treatments and 
investigators tasked with finding out the source of 
the plague.
Locations: This mission plays differently according 
to where it happens, read the description carefully 
and then either choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Diagnosis! (City only). You must go onto the 
streets to investigate - each time you have a social 
encounter you can make a Healing special skill roll. 
Each success gives you some understanding of the 
disease. After you have accumulated 3 successes, you 
can a8empt to devise a treatment. First you must visit 
the Hospital or Marketplace location and purchase 
herbs, which will cost you 2d6 gold pieces. Then 
make another Healing special skill roll with a -4 
penalty to blend them together in an effective manner 
to make a poultice. If you fail, you must go back and 
diagnose another 3 
people before you 
can try again - but 
each time you try, 
you gain +2 bonus 
to your roll (+2 on 
the second a8empt, 
+4 on the third and 
so on...don’t forget 
to buy new herbs 
each time!).
Task 2: Treatment (City Only). Once you have 
successfully made a poultice, you can a8empt to 
apply it. This time, each time you have a social 
encounter make an Etique8e or Leadership skill roll 
with a +3 bonus in order to convince them to use your 
concoction. Of course, successfully fighting the 
disease will enrage those spreading it. Each time you 
succeed in healing someone with your poultice, make 
an Awareness skill test to spot someone who is 
paying particular a8ention to your work - if you 
succeed you can unmask a false plague doctor.
False Plague Doctor 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Club 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
With a hiss the False Plague Doctor pulls off their 
leather mask revealing a pox scarred face, dripping 
with boils. On the first round they will hurl a vial of 
plague spores at you - test against your LUCK or find 
yourself surrounded by a choking miasma which 
applies a penalty of -2 to your combat and spell 
casting skills for 1d6 rounds.
Task 3: Approach by Stealth.  When you defeat the 
False Plague Doctor you can search them for their 
manifest, detailing where they are operating and how 
to pick up new supplies. Drop or roll a dice onto your 
map and find the nearest Hospital, Graveyard or 
Garbage Heap - this is where the next supply pick up 
will be made. You can choose to sneak up (make a test 
against your Sneaking skill) or use the clothing of the 
False Plague Doctor as a disguise (you may wish to 
wash it first) - make a test against your Disguise skill. 
If you succeed you have approached without being 
detected and get to strike against your opponent. If 
you fail this test you must fight a henchman instead. 
If you only fight a henchman, the plague continues 
and you must try again, but this time you have 
already completed the step of preparing the poultice 
and can start from that point.


--- PAGE 339 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
338
Wilderness: As plague runs riot in the town, you are 
sent out to collect the herbs needed to treat it. Once 
you arrive in the area described you must search for 
them using Healing or Plant Lore skills. You may 
make three rolls each day in your desperate search 
for ingredients. Sadly for you, False Plague Doctors 
have been sent to stop you. Each time you find an 
ingredient, roll 1d6 - on a 1 or 2 you are a8acked!  
False Plague Doctor 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Club 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
After you acquire a manifest (see above), the supply 
drop will be in the same area and must be 
approached with the same rules as in the city.
Dungeon: The plague spreaders are storing vials of 
fresh plague in this dungeon. Your task is to find and 
(carefully) destroy them with fire. A random room in 
each section of the dungeon contains a strongbox 
with 1d6 vials of plague. Once you have recovered at 
least 15 vials, you will find that the point for the 
supply drop is one of the rooms in the next dungeon 
section - pick one at random and use the same rules 
for approaching it as in the city (Sneaking or Disguise 
skill test).
Special Reward for Success: Aiding the sick has 
earned you the respect of those that dedicate their 
lives to healing, one of whom offers to tutor you - the 
next time you increase your Healing special skill it 
costs half the usual amount of experience points.
Mission 9: Cruel Cultists
Overview: Titan is a dangerous place and people go 
missing all the time, never to be seen again. However 
there has been a spate of disappearances recently, 
much more than usual, and you have decided to 
investigate and discover what is behind it.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Investigation. Firstly you must find out what 
is going on and identify the culprits. 
City: Take a dice and roll or drop it onto your map, 
noting the nearest location as a place where 
somebody has recently gone missing. Once you have 
moved to this location you can start your 
investigation. Talking to the citizens in this location, 
use your Etique8e or Law special skills to uncover 
clues. Make three skill tests. Each time you succeed 
make a note of how much you succeeded by - for 
example, if your Etique8e skill total is 7 and you roll 
a 4 you have succeeded by 3. Add together your 
successes then roll 2d6 and see if you can get less than 
or equal to the total - if you succeed you have 
uncovered a description of the cultists. If not you 
should repeat the process at a different location (the 
kidnappings are frequent enough that you can 
investigate 1d3 locations each day). 
Wilderness: You’ve been alerted to disappearances in 
an area of wilderness (traders and trappers going 
missing). Cultists have taken people to use as slaves. 
Once you arrive in the area you must look for slave 
labourers and liberate them from the cultist 
taskmasters. Use your Region Lore, Awareness or 
Hunting skills to look for signs of slave labour - you 
may search up to three times a day but with a -2 
penalty (the cultists are hiding their work).  


--- PAGE 340 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
339
Dungeon: The cultists have taken people to use as 
slaves, toiling in the darkness underground. Once 
you arrive in the area you must look for the slaves 
and liberate them from their taskmasters. Each 
section of the dungeon contains two slaves, chained 
up in random rooms. They are sick and frightened, 
you must test your Etique8e or Con skills to get any 
useful information from them. When you have made 
four successes, you have uncovered the location of 
the hidden temple - it is hidden behind a secret door 
in one of the sections you have already visited, pick a 
room from these sections at random (this means you 
skip Task 2 of this mission).
Task 2: Cultist Confronter.  Once you have obtained 
a description, drop or roll a dice onto the map to see 
where the cultist is living and go there to confront 
them. When you confront them, make a skill test 
against either the Disguise or Con special skills to 
convince them that you are ready to join their cult 
and reveal the location of the hidden temple. If you 
fail the a8empt, the cultist does not believe you and 
instead you must fight them!
Cultist 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
7 
Weapon:  
Club 
Armour:  
None. 
Dropping all pretence of normality and le8ing off a 
stream of curses and promises of doom, the cultist 
a8acks you! They will fight to the death in service of 
the gods of chaos. When a8acked the cultist goes 
berserk - they make two combat rolls each round, 
both with a -2 penalty, and use the highest of the two.
Should you succeed with your Con or Disguise skill 
test, you have tricked them into telling you where 
their secret temple is. Drop or roll a dice onto your 
map and mark the location nearest to it. You may 
now proceed there and confront them in earnest.
Wilderness: Every group of slaves is a8ended by a 
cultist; use your Con or Disguise skill as above to 
trick them into revealing the location of the temple, 
which is cunningly hidden somewhere nearby.
Task 3: The Hidden Temple. 
City: Your information has led you to a quiet 
alleyway, with an unremarkable building that has a 
plain wooden doorway. 
Wilderness: The cultists temple is cunningly hidden 
by natural features of the landscape, without the 
information you obtained you would have walked 
right past it.  
Dungeon: As noted above, you will find yourself 
directed to a secret door you missed in your earlier 
adventuring. Looking more closely you can see 
markings cut into the frame that confirm you have 
arrived at the right place. Readying yourself you 
push the doorway open and step inside, to reveal a 
small room with one exit - a set of torch lit stone steps 
leading down. 
You can hear chanting from below - moving down 
cautiously you soon see that the steps lead to a large 
cellar, bedecked with crudely painted scenes of 
destruction and lit by candles made of reddy-black 
tallow that fill the air with a foul smelling incense. 
Standing by an altar is a large man with wild bushy 
hair and piercing hate filled eyes, who is chanting 
something in a demonic language - when he sees you 
he lets out a scream of rage and charges to a8ack.
Cult Leader 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
11 
Weapon:  
Morning Star 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass. 


--- PAGE 341 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
340
As the Cult Leader comes to a8ack the candles 
lighting the room flare into life and give off even 
more of the stinking incense - these choking fumes 
seem to weaken you, causing a penalty of -1 to your 
damage rolls and spell casting rolls whilst fighting 
him. When a8acked the Cult Leader goes berserk - 
they make two combat rolls each round, both with a 
-2 penalty, and use the highest of the two.
Task 4: Through the Portal. Should you defeat the 
leader you can search the secret temple. There is li8le 
here of value, but behind one of the wall drapes you 
find a small chamber containing a magic door - a 
portal to another location. It has several glowing 
runes carved about it and you can see that their magic 
is fading - they are starting to flicker and dim. You 
can choose to enter the portal in the hopes that it 
takes you to your opponent, or turn around and 
leave, knowing that the portal will be inactive within 
the hour.
If you leave, you have succeeded in the mission but 
must now start another to have a chance at fighting 
your foe. If you decide to step bravely through the 
portal, you touch a number of runes at random and 
make a test against your LUCK. If you have any 
points in the Magic - Lore special skill, treat them as 
a bonus to your LUCK roll. If you succeed in the test, 
you have appeared at the lair of your opponent and 
may fight them. If you fail the test, you appear in a 
small room and must fight a henchman. If you roll a 
double six, you appear mid-air, 30’ above the ground 
and fall to the ground taking 2d6 points of damage 
from the fall! If you started in a dungeon, you appear 
in the air outside the dungeon before falling - at least 
it saved you a walk!
Special Reward for Success: You have liberated some 
folks from the misery of slavery and they are grateful 
- whilst in this se8lement you will be offered a place 
to sleep and some simple food in a hovel in one of the 
Slums areas, should you wish to stay there.
Mission 10: Cursed Idols
Overview: Many of the people, rich and poor, like to 
fill their homes with religious idols of all sizes, costs 
and shapes in the hope that the gods will look kindly 
upon them. It is a practice encouraged by the temples 
and they are the main benefactor from the sale of 
these items, which leads some of the pious clergy to 
raise the prices of their relics, which in turn leads to a 
thriving black market in idols which are maybe a bit 
less holy but certainly a lot cheaper.
In this case someone has been supplying cursed idols 
- carved wooden statues with exceptionally lifelike 
features that unfortunately have a tendency to come 
alive at night and savagely a8ack the nearest person! 
Several people have been badly hurt and the temples 
are besieged with people asking the priests to come 
and cast a blessing on their homes - no one knows if 
their idols are normal or cursed!
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Find a temple. Your first step is to move to any 
Temple location (remember every se8lement should 
have one) and offer your assistance, which will be 
gratefully accepted. The priest in charge recognises 
your heroic qualities and is keen to make use of you - 
he gives you a blessed censer and some incest, telling 
you that it will drive any cursed idols into a rage if 
they get a whiff of the smoke and with those 
instructions shoves you out and on your way.
Task 2: Find some cursed Idols. 
City: When you enter a new location ( you can make 
an Etique8e or Leadership skill roll to find some 
‘customers’ for your services. If you don’t find any, 
move to another location and try again. When you 
have found someone who wants their home checked 
you can follow them in, light the censor and swing it 


--- PAGE 342 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
341
around in the hope that something will happen. As 
the smoke trails around, you watch anxiously for a 
reaction - roll 1d6. On a 5 or 6 a cursed idol gives a 
retching cough and springs to life! If nothing 
happens, find another customer. 
Wilderness: You have been told where the components 
for the idols are being harvested and been asked to go 
to that area and deal with the problem. Once in the 
right area you must roll a Region Lore or Crafting 
skill roll to find the places where wood and other 
parts are being acquired - each one is guarded by a 
Cursed Idol! You may look twice each day.
Dungeon: You take your incense into the dungeon 
with and waft it around as you progress - there will 
be two cursed idols hidden in each section, assign 
them to random rooms. They will come to life as you 
search the room after defeating any monsters or 
hazards it may contain.
Task 3: Defeat the Idols. 
Cursed Idol 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
7 
Weapon:  
Small Claw 
Armour: Monster Medium. 
The idol is a humanoid figure carved from wood (and 
so immune to a8acks that wouldn’t  damage wood 
and most mind affecting spells). It leaps to a8ack, 
clawing at you and screeching a hideous cry of rage.  
Once you defeat it, it’s time to find the idol maker.
Task 4: Piece together the clues. Examining pieces of 
the Cursed Idols after you have defeated them will 
lead you to discover the location of the maker. 
City: Ask the former owner where they bought it. 
They will be eager to help but their memory is not 
perfect - you get some details of the description, but 
is it enough? Each owner provides you with 1d6 clues 
about the vendor. Roll 2d6, add your City Lore or 
Awareness skill and add the total number of clues 
you have recovered with a target number of 25. Once 
you succeed you have identified the name and 
location of the person selling the cursed idols. The 
workshop is in a random location in the city.
Wilderness: After defeating each idol you find 1d6 
clues about the workshop location. Roll 2d6, add 
your Region Lore or Crafting skill and the total 
number of clues you have recovered until you meet 
the TN of 25 - this allows you to locate the workshop 
of the idol maker; it will be in the same area.
Dungeon: After the idols have been made they are 
sent to a dungeon to absorb the evil magics of those 
places. Each section contains two idols that are 
hidden in random rooms - you can use your incense 
to search for them after you have defeated any 
monsters or devices in the room.
After defeating each idol you recover 1d6 clues about 
the location of the idol maker. Roll 2d6 and add your 
Underground Lore or Crafting skill points and the 
total number of clues you have recovered until you 
meet the target number of 25 - this allows you to 
locate the workshop of the idol maker; it will be one 
of the rooms in the next dungeon section (assign it 
randomly).


--- PAGE 343 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
342
Task 5: Defeat the crafter. 
Idol Maker 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Weapon:  
Club 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
Working away in their cramped and dusty 
workshop, the Idol Maker will also activate one of her 
Cursed Idols (see above) to fight alongside her when 
a8acked, though this one is not completely finished 
and has SKILL 5 STAMINA 6. You must fight them 
both together.
At the last the idol maker, subdued but not dead, will 
a8empt to parley for her life with knowledge of the 
whereabouts of your opponent. If you finish her off at 
this point, the trail runs cold. If you wish to bargain 
you spare her life - bandage her wounds and so on - 
and interrogate her. Make a test against Etique8e, 
Leadership or Con skills (your choice). If you succeed 
you have found your opponent’s lair - (in the city it is 
at a random location, in the wilderness it is half a 
day's travel, in a dungeon it is via a secret door 
located in one of the rooms you have already passed 
through!) You may move there and strike at your 
opponent. If you fail your skill test, the idol maker 
has tricked you - when you get to the location 
indicated there is nothing there and you must start 
again.
Special Reward for Success: Ridding the world of 
these idols is a relief to those that collect them; the 
next time you are in a se8lement one of the craftsmen 
that makes the genuine items presents you with an 
idol (occupies one inventory slot). You can use it, 
once, to cast Bless upon yourself as the priest ability 
(lasts 10 rounds) after which it becomes just a normal 
statue8e worth 2d6gp.
Mission 11: Elemental Fury
Overview: In secret, portals have been opened to the 
elemental planes, unleashing the fury of angered 
elementals who are taking the opportunity to hurl 
their wrath upon the sha8ered citizens. In the cities, 
people run screaming from their a8acks, in the wilds 
elementals are destroying farmland and a8acking 
merchants and in the deepest dungeons plans are 
made to maintain the chaos. You must come to the aid 
of the people and stop the a8acks.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Defeat an Elemental. Firstly, you must send 
some of the elementals back to the planes where they 
belong. 
City: There will be one a8ack each day, (Roll 1d6:
1-2:  
Before midday
3-4:  
After midday 
5-6:  
At night. 
The screams of the panicking citizens let you know 
when an a8ack is happening - drop or roll a dice onto 
your map to see where it is and head there without 
delay! Once arrived you find a large elemental 
rampaging through the streets, causing havoc. You 
must intervene.  
Wilderness: An area of the wilderness has been 
plagued by elementals. Use your Awareness, Region 
Lore or Magic-Lore to find an elemental to fight; you 
may look twice each day you spend here.  
Dungeon: It has come to your a8ention that smugglers 
are storing fragments of elemental essence in this 
dungeon, on their way to take them to a city. You 
would be doing everyone a favour if you go in and 
deal with the problem. You have been given an 
elemental lodestone that points you in the direction 


--- PAGE 344 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
343
of elemental disturbances. For each section of the 
dungeon, pick a random room and add a secret door 
- when you get near your lodestone will start 
twitching to show you where to search. When you 
open the secret door roll 1d6 - on a 1-2 you find a 
piece of pure elemental essence, on 3-5 you find an 
elemental that a8acks you (roll to see what kind) and 
on a 6 you find the smuggler! For each hidden room 
you enter, add +1 to this roll. Once you find the 
smuggler proceed to Task 4.
When you find an elemental, roll to see which type is 
a8acking, they will fight to the death!
Roll 1d6  
Elemental Type.
(Reroll 5-6)
1 
 
Fire Elemental 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
9 
Armour:  
None. 
A8acks with lashing flames that cause 1d3 points of damage, armour has no effect.
2 
 
Water Elemental 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Armour:  
Light. 
Ba8ers you with watery fists, treat as mace, ignores shields.
3 
 
Air Elemental 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Armour:  
None. 
Has 2 A8acks of slicing winds, treat as short swords.
4 
 
Earth Elemental 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
11 
Armour:  
Medium. 
Pummels you with a heavy stone fist, treat as morning star.
5 
 
Cold Elemental
SKILL  
7
STAMINA 
8
Armour 
Light
A8acks with a touch of burning cold.  Inflicts 1d3 damage.  Leather protects as normal, but metal 
armour adds to the damage taken.
6 
 
Metal Elemental
SKILL  
8
STAMINA 
10
Armour 
Heavy
A8acks with bladed hands (as Sword)
*Each type of elemental is immune to a3acks that are based on its type, so a fire elemental is immune to fire damage etc.


--- PAGE 345 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
344
Task 2: Finding the source. Where are these 
elementals coming from? 
City: It seems that the elementals appear out of 
nowhere and you quickly realise they must be 
coming from a catacomb. In the location where you 
fought the elemental, make an Underground Lore or 
Awareness skill test to find the entrance. If you fail, 
you’ll have to wait for another a8ack the next day. 
Should you find the entrance, generate a catacomb 
using the usual rules. You will need to clear all the 
rooms to find the hidden chamber containing an altar 
upon which sits a piece of pure elemental substance 
(a smooth ball of polished stone, a vial containing 
crystal clear spring water or air from a mountain 
peak, burning pitch that radiates intense and constant 
heat) that acts as a beacon calling elementals to it. It is 
easy to disrupt the portal by taking the elemental 
substance, but what should you do with it? 
Wilderness: The elemental has emerged from a nearby 
cave where someone has hidden a piece of pure 
elemental substance that is acting as a beacon. Make 
a Region Lore or Hunting roll to find it; if you fail 
you’ll have to look for another elemental to fight on 
the next day. When you find it, you come up with a 
plan. You can destroy it and see who responds. You 
will need to wait at the cave for 1d6 days (don’t forget 
weather and encounters) until the smuggler turns up 
- proceed to Task 4.
Task 3:  Investigating the pure element: Now you 
have recovered the ‘beacon’ of pure elemental 
essence it’s time to discover who placed it there. 
City: Handling it carefully, you move to the nearest 
College or Temple location to find someone learned 
in elemental lore. Finding someone takes 1d6 hours, 
after which you must offer the pure substance and 
ask their advice. The scholar is interested but tells you 
they need some herbs from the Marketplace to 
investigate. They give you a few coins and a list of 
instructions. Once at the Marketplace location, make 
a test of Bargain. If you succeed you get the herbs at 
the right price, if you fail the test you must pay an 
additional 1d6 gp to acquire them (the fact that you 
are trying to save the city doesn’t seem to ma8er!). 
Now you can return to the scholar at the College or 
Temple where you met them and ask them to 
investigate. Taking the herbs they put them in an 
incense burner and, as smoke fills the air, start an 
incantation. After some time (1d3 hours), the smoke 
swirls and forms into a vision - you see a man, 
hunched over the altar you found in the Catacomb, 
placing the piece of pure element down and opening 
the portal. After that the smoke swirls and forms 
more pictures, each showing what you believe to be a 
smuggler, bringing in the pure elemental pieces to be 
used in the creation of a portal. Soon however the 
smoke clears and the scholar asks you to wait a li8le 
longer, as they believe they can make something to 
help you. After another hour of tinkering they 
present you with a sort of compass, which they tell 
you will point toward a piece of pure elemental 
substance when it comes close - this is a means to 
intercept the smugglers!
Now you may take the compass and wait - any 
location in the city will do. After 1d6 hours, you see 
the compass twitch - move according to its direction 
(roll 1d6 - 1= north, 2=east, 3=south, 4=west, 5,6 roll 
again. If the direction is outside the city, move left (1-
3) or right (4-6) along the boundary of the city). 
Finding the location of the smuggler requires 1d6 
moves, and don’t forget to check for encounters along 
the way. In addition, the compass might misfire - 
each time you use it, roll 1d6 - on a roll of one it has 


--- PAGE 346 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
345
stopped working for a short time, but this is long 
enough for the smuggler to get away, and you will 
need to try again the next day (the compass will have 
started working again by then). 
With the compass in hand it is easy, when close, to 
identify the smuggler. A8acking them is not an 
Unlawful Action. As you approach them, the 
smuggler realises the game is up and turns to fight 
you.
Task 4: Confront the Smuggler. You have found the 
person responsible for summoning the elementals. 
Deal with them.
Smuggler 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Short Sword 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass. 
They will fight but also try to bargain their life in 
return for information! Each round as you fight, make 
a test against your Leadership, Etique8e or Con (your 
choice). Make a note of how many times you succeed 
in the test. After you have defeated them (or let them 
flee, if you wish), you can see if you have extracted 
the location of your opponent. 
City: Roll a City Lore test - you may add a bonus of 
one for each time you succeeded in your social skill 
test whilst fighting them. 
Wilderness: Roll a Region Lore test - you may add a 
bonus of one for each time you succeeded in your 
social skill test whilst fighting them. 
Dungeon: Make an Underground Lore test - you may 
add a bonus of one for each time you succeeded in 
your social skill test whilst fighting them.
If you succeed with this roll, you have worked out 
where to go and may strike at your opponent. If you 
fail the roll, you have misinterpreted what was said 
and find only a henchman when you go to 
investigate. 
Use the usual method of dropping or rolling a dice 
onto your map to find out where you think your 
opponent is lurking in the City. In the wilderness, 
you believe they are hiding out somewhere within 
half a day’s travel. In a dungeon, you think they are 
in a room in the next dungeon section.
Special Reward for Success: Your contact with the 
elements has rubbed off on you, imbuing you with a 
limited amount of protection. Choose one of the 
elements (fire, earth, water, air) to be temporarily 
hardened against. You can ignore the next 6 points of 
STAMINA damage you receive of this type, whether 
it be from an elemental or a creature using the 
elements.


--- PAGE 347 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
346
Mission 12: Rediscovered Runes
Overview: There is great excitement among scholars. 
Heroes such as yourself (though obviously not as 
capable or daring) have delved into the catacombs 
and dungeons, returning with carved tablets bearing 
strange runes, which are rumoured to be the key to 
great power. A reward has been posted for the return 
of more of these tablets for anyone brave enough to 
find them.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Find a Catacomb. As the rune bearing tablets 
seem to be found in underground complexes, you 
must find a catacomb or dungeon and explore it. 
City: Using the normal means, explore your city until 
you find a catacomb to explore. 
Wilderness: The randomly selected area of wilderness 
has been found to contain a great number of ancient 
ruins, which has drawn a8ention from all across the 
lands. Once you arrive, look for catacombs - make an 
Underground Lore or Region Lore roll to find them, 
you may look twice per day. Once you find a 
catacomb, use the Catacomb encounter rules 
(encounter M4) as in the city to generate one. 
Dungeon: In this dungeon your opponent is gathering 
powerful ancient rune tablets in preparation for using 
them against a nearby city. Your job is to enter the 
dungeon and destroy them! When you create each 
section, randomly select two rooms to contain a chest 
of rune tablets. 
Task 2: Find and maybe destroy. Now you have a 
place to look, you need to find and deal with the rune 
tablets. 
City / Wilderness: Generate a Catacomb as per the 
usual rules (encounter M4). Once inside you must 
clear the entire catacomb, to give you the time to 
search for a tablet without interruption. Make a roll 
against your Awareness, Underground Lore or Magic 
Lore skills (your choice). If you have the Second Sight 
skill you can add +2 to the roll as a bonus due to the 
magical nature of the tablets. If you succeed, you 
have found a tablet inscribed with ancient runes that 
matches the description given by the scholars. It is 
bulky and occupies one inventory slot, unless carried 
in your hands. The tablets are fragile and unstable - 
any time you take damage whilst carrying one, roll 
1d6. On a roll of 1 the tablet sha8ers into a thousand 
pieces, causing you 1d3 points of damage as it blows 
apart.
You can take it to the College location (in the 
wilderness, the scholars have set up a camp near the 
strange ruins) and sell it for 2d6gp to a very excited 
scholar who is eager to get to work on it. If you fail 
the roll, you have not found a tablet and must search 
again in another catacomb - which means finding 
another catacomb entrance to explore. 
Dungeon: When you have dealt with whatever is in 
the rooms, you can deal with the runes - test against 
your Underground Lore or Magic Lore (with a +2 
bonus if you have the Second Sight skill) to see if you 
can locate and destroy them, so they don’t fall into 
the hands of your opponent (who has agents 
searching the same dungeon). If you fail the roll, you 
have overlooked them and mark them down as taken 
by your opponent. 


--- PAGE 348 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
347
Task 3: Confrontation. Your opponent is also 
searching for these tablets. They have the resources to 
employ people to search the catacombs and 
dungeons too, for their own dark purposes. 
City/ Wilderness: Each day roll 1d6 - on a 1,2 or 3 they 
have recovered a runic tablet - make a note of it. You 
must keep a track of how many tablets your 
opponent has recovered each day that passes. 
Dungeon: Roll at the end of each dungeon section you 
complete. The race is won by the one that recovers six 
of the tablets first. If it is your foe, they will use the 
runes inscribed on the tablets to conjure a great storm 
that rains down lightning and floods upon the city for 
a day, causing huge destruction and misery - you can 
consider the mission failed. 
City / Wilderness: If you succeed you have prevented 
this cataclysm and earn the gratitude of the scholars. 
They have been monitoring the situation carefully 
and a8empting to scry out the location of their rivals. 
Drop or roll a dice onto your map and note the 
location (in the wilderness you must travel for half a 
day) - you can go there and have a chance to strike at 
your opponent! This must be done within one day of 
handing in the final tablet, lest your foe realises the 
game is up and finds a new place to set up their lair. 
Dungeon: If you win the race, your opponent will be 
found, waiting for news, in the next dungeon section 
you create. If you fail the race, they have taken their 
tablets and escaped to cause destruction.
Special Reward for Success: The local scholars are 
grateful for your work; in the nearest city you may 
call on them to complete one task related to Magic 
Lore or to identify a magical item for  you. This is a 
one-time favour.
Mission 13: Creatures of Chaos
Overview: Dredged from the most terrible dungeons, 
lured from the catacombs or even summoned from 
the planes of hell, these creatures are bent on 
destruction and carnage. They have been brought to 
civilization for the sole purpose of causing misery. 
Smuggled into the cities of Titan, it is your job to find 
them and deal with them, before they kill more 
people. The beasts are under the control of a 
degenerate Beastmaster - you must deal with the 
creatures and track down the person controlling 
them.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Hunting Beasts. Your job is to locate 
dangerous beasts and defeat them. 
City: In each location you can search once per/day. 
Make a Hunting or Animal Lore skill roll to find a 
trail and follow it to an isolated house or alleyway 
where you can do ba8le. You must make the usual 
encounter rolls for each location as you search them. 
Wilderness: You have been given directions to a 
specific area where a number of beasts have been 
unleashed. Each day make a Hunting skill or Animal 
Lore skill test to find a beast to fight, remembering to 
roll as usual for encounters and weather. 
Dungeon: There are two creatures of chaos in each 
section of the dungeon; assign them to random 
rooms. If there is already a monster in that room, 
replace it with a creature of chaos.
Each time you find a creature of chaos, roll to see 
exactly what you are fighting.


--- PAGE 349 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
348
1d6 
Creature of Chaos
1-2 
Giant Toad: 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Large Bite 
Armour:  
Light 
Special: The Giant Toad has a poison gland which means if it does hit it causes one additional point of   
STAMINA damage, which is not prevented by armour. The gland can be ‘recovered’ with an Animal 
Lore or Trap Knowledge skill test and is worth 10gp.
3-4 
Salamander: 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Weapon:  
Small Bite 
Armour:  
Medium 
Special: The fiery Salamander occasionally spits a gob of fire at you! Each round roll 1d6, on a 1-2 the 
Salamander spits a ball of fire in addition to its bite, which automatically hits for 1d3 points of damage.
5-6 
Rabid Wolf Hound: 
SKILL   
8 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Large Bite 
Armour:  
Light. 
Special: The Wolf has filth encrusted fangs and if it damages you, you must test your LUCK or roll on 
the Diseases table (Table 4.3.2 Diseases) after the fight,
Task 2: Gathering Clues for a Hunt. Each time you 
defeat a creature of chaos, you can search its lair to 
discover clues about its master, trying to discern 
where the beastmaster is hiding. Gathering more 
clues increases your chances of finding the 
Beastmaster. 
City: make a City Lore or Hunting skill test with a -6 
penalty, but each time you defeat another beast you 
gain new insights and get a bonus of +2 to your skill 
roll, which is cumulative - +2 on the second beast, +4 
on the third and so on. 
Wilderness: Use your Region Lore or Hunting skills. 
Dungeon: Use your Underground Lore or Hunting 
skill to take the test.
When you succeed with the skill test, you are sure 
you have worked out the location of the Beastmaster. 
City: Drop or roll a dice onto the map to discover 
where the beastmaster is hiding. He can be at any 
location except the Keep, Docks, Wealthy Streets or 
City Gate. 
Wilderness: The Beastmaster is in the same area as the 
beasts, requiring half a day of travel to get to. 
Dungeon: The Beastmaster is in a random room of the 
next dungeon section you create.


--- PAGE 350 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
349
Task 3: Defeat the Beastmaster 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
11 
Weapon:  
Morning Star 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
The beastmaster is a scowling brute of a man who has 
the job of wrangling the various creatures of chaos 
and training them to go out and a8ack. He is more 
devoted to his beasts than any cause, and he won’t 
negotiate with Heroes who have killed his animals. 
Once you have defeated the beastmaster, you need to 
visit his hideout at least once a day to see if your 
opponent has arrived to check up on him - however, 
you must also keep up the pretence that the beasts are 
still busy or your opponent will become suspicious 
and send a henchman instead. 
Task 4: Surveillance. Keeping a close eye on the 
hideout (which means you must stay here or revisit 
the hideout each day), roll a 1d6 to see if your 
opponent is visiting, which happens on a 5 or 6. For 
each day that passes you must test your Animal Lore 
or Hunting skill with a +3 bonus - you are making 
false tracks to pretend that the beasts are still active. 
If you fail any of these tests your opponent has 
become suspicious, and the check-up is made by a 
henchman. If you pass the tests, you eventually get a 
chance to strike at your opponent.  Remember to roll 
for 
random 
encounters, 
wandering 
monsters, 
weather and so on whilst you are waiting!
Special Reward for Success: Seeing your efforts in 
dealing with this problem an animal trainer seeks 
you out and offers you a trained Hound 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
5 
Weapon:  
Small Bite 
Armour:  
None. 
The hound needs to be fed one meal per day and will 
not fight (he is cowardly) but whilst you have him, 
you have +1 bonus to your Hunting skill tests.
Mission 14: Repel the Invaders
Overview: A horde of creatures of chaos have been 
unleashed, seeking treasure and bloodshed, and are 
running amok in the streets and fields. As a hero, it is 
your job to find them and bring an end to the carnage. 
They are appearing almost everywhere, seemingly at 
random, so you can start your work wherever you 
like.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Find a fight!  
City: As you move through the city, roll 1d6 as you 
enter each new location - on a 5 or 6 it is under a8ack. 
Your aim is to defeat 5 raiders (or all of them, if there 
are less than 5) within two days of starting this 
mission, after which the city guards have rallied 
enough to clear away any remaining creatures. If you 
fail to do this, you should mark the mission as failed 
and make another roll on the table. Don’t forget to 
make a roll to find out what the consequences of 
failure are! 
Wilderness: The area indicated to you is under a8ack 
from a raiding horde. Go to the area and make a 
stand! Once you have arrived you set up a camp and 
light a fire, knowing the smoke will a8ract 
opponents. You may fight up to four opponents in 
one day; you must defeat 5 raiders to a8ract the 
a8ention of their commander. You may rest between 
fights. 
Dungeon: You have found the dungeon from which 
the raiders are being recruited. When you create a 
section, randomly assign two rooms to contain 
monsters from the table, they replace any other 
monsters that might be in the room. Once you have 
defeated 5, the next room that contains a ‘raider’ has 
the Orc Commander in it.


--- PAGE 351 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
350
The raiders are varied monsters and you don’t know 
until you confront them what you are facing.
1d6 
Raider (the raiders have no treasure and are 
not up for any type of social interaction)
1-2 
Goblin berserker: 
SKILL   
4 
 
STAMINA  
8 
Armour:  
Light. 
Weapon:  
Great Axe
3-5 
Orc Warrior: 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
7
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapon:  
Sword
6 
Troll: 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
8 
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapon:  
Mace. A8acks: 2
Should you defeat them, your heroic exploits have 
enraged one of their commanders who is now 
seeking you out to confront you. After the end of your 
fifth fight, you have a scant pause of a few minutes 
(roll 2d6 to see how many) before a large orc comes 
barrelling towards you, shouting curses!
Task 2: A fight finds you! Your actions have a8racted 
the a8ention of a leader. 
Orc Commander 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
11
Armour:  
Medium 
Weapon:  
Ba8leaxe. 
The commander is an orc of great size, ba8le-scarred 
and ferocious. He is furiously angry and gains +1 to 
his damage rolls, should he hit.
As you ba8le him, he cannot resist gloating about 
what your opponent is planning to do - he speaks 
surprisingly good common for an orc. You must take 
the opportunity to tease out the information you 
need. Each round, make a test against your Con 
special skill to see if you can trick him into revealing 
something. You may wish to prolong the fight to get 
more chances, though he is a dangerous opponent. 
Make a note of how many times you succeed before 
you defeat him. As you wipe down your blades, you 
ponder what he said and try to work out where your 
opponent is. Roll 1d6 and add one for each time you 
succeeded on your Con special skill test. You need a 
total of 7 or more to work out where to go - if you get 
less than that, you have succeeded with the mission 
but have no clue as to where your opponent is hiding.
If you did get 7 or more, drop or roll a dice onto the 
map (City) to reveal the location where you can strike 
at your opponent. 
Wilderness: Follow the rules above to see if you have 
discovered where your opponent might be hiding in 
this area - it will be somewhere close by.  
Dungeon: Follow the rules above, but if you fail the 
information roll you believe your opponent is hiding 
outside the dungeon in a nearby location; by the time 
you realise your error there is no chance of finding 
them. If you succeed in the roll you will find the lair 
in a random room of the next dungeon section you 
create.
Special Reward for Success: Your force of arms has 
not gone unnoticed. You are presented with a master 
quality weapon of your choice. (See the rules in the 
Combat Companion or if you don’t have this 
available, treat it as a weapon for which you replace a 
damage roll of 1 with a 2). It is non magical.


--- PAGE 352 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
351
Mission 15: Skulking Beast
Overview: Some manner of vicious beast has been 
dredged from the depths by your opponent and set to 
causing havoc. It is emerging from its hiding spot at 
night and a8acking people, leaving them dead or 
mauled. 
Some 
have 
disappeared 
completely, 
presumably carried off as food! The Watch have been 
unable to stop it - some people have unkindly 
suggested they aren’t trying too hard - and it is 
imperative that some hero steps forward to deal with 
the menace.
It is important to note that this mission has to be 
carried out at night, so use the ‘nigh8ime’ column of 
the encounter table as you move around.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Find the Beast. The beast strikes each night, 
you must dash to it as soon as you hear the screams. 
City: Drop or roll a dice onto your map to see where. 
Once it strikes, news of its a8ack spreads quickly as 
bells are rung and night watchmen summoned with 
whistles. 
You 
should 
move 
to 
the 
location 
immediately, but make a note of how many 
encounters you have on the way - this will affect how 
fresh the trail is when you arrive. 
Wilderness: You hear a distant howl and hurry in that 
direction…the beast is terrorising this area, make one 
encounter roll as you head toward it. Remember to 
use the nigh8ime encounters when hunting for the 
beast.  
Dungeon: The beast is being trained to kill in this 
dungeon; in each dungeon section, you will come 
across remnants of its ‘work’.
Having got to the scene of an a8ack you begin 
searching for clues. You can choose to use either your 
Hunting or Animal Lore skills. Roll 2d6, add your 
skill and deduct one for each encounter you had on 
your way here. If your total is 20, you have picked up 
the trail and can follow it back to the lair of the beast 
(see below). If you roll less than that, you have 
gathered some information but the trail eluded you - 
the next time you a8empt to track the beast you can 
add +2 to your roll as you get to know more about it. 
This bonus is cumulative (+2 on the second a8empt, 
+4 on the third and so on) so eventually you will catch 
your prey.
Task 2: The Lair of the Beast. Having successfully 
followed its trail you find yourself at the beast's lair 
City: At the location of the a8ack. 
Wilderness: Close by in the same area. 
Dungeon: In a random room of the section). 
City / Wilderness: Use the rules for the ‘Catacombs 
Entrance’ location to construct the lair, which is 
always in some underground complex, but with only 
1d3 rooms. The beast is, of course, in the last part of 
the catacomb and you may have to fight through 
other monsters to reach it. The lair has the quality of 
Misty - A strange mist swirls through the air 
penetrating every corner of this dungeon. Awareness 
skill has a -2 penalty and Sneak skill has a +2 bonus. 
You hear shuffling in the darkness. Once you have 
arrived it’s time to find out what you are fighting.


--- PAGE 353 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
352
1d6 
Beast - it is hiding in the mists and gains +2 on the 
first round of combat
1-2 
Death Dog 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
9 
A8acks:  
Large Bite 
Armour:  
Light
3-4 
Champaque 
SKILL   
8 
STAMINA  
10 
A8acks:  
Large Claw 
Armour:  
Light
5-6 
Giant Lizard 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
11 
A8acks:  
Large Bite 
Armour:  
Medium
Once the beast has been disposed of you can see that 
as well as living here it was guarding a concealed 
passage leading up to a hidden room! This could be 
where your opponent is hiding - but will the 
commotion of your ba8le with their beast have given 
them time to escape?
Roll 1d6 and add +1 for each round of combat it took 
you to defeat the beast. If the total is 10 or less you 
may strike at your opponent. If the total is 11 or more, 
the noise of ba8le gives them time to escape and you 
are left to ba8le a henchman. Unfortunately this 
means that on the next night, your opponent releases 
another beast into the city (from another hidden 
location) and you must start your hunt anew! This 
mission is only completed when you have succeeded 
in fighting your opponent at least once. Happy 
Hunting!
Special Reward for Success: A friendly trapper offers 
to skin and butcher the beast for you; The hide can be 
fashioned into a stylish and unusual heavy winter 
cape, or sold for 4d6gp.
Mission 16: Ogre Stew (City only).
Overview: They say that ‘the first bite is with the eye’ 
but when it comes to ogre stew it is quite likely that 
the first bite is an actual eye, closely followed by a toe, 
nose or an ear. Ogres do not have many talents but a 
combination of iron stomachs and a carefree a8itude 
towards recipes means they can produce truly 
pungent food. The ‘best’ ogre cooks can work away 
for months on a giant cauldron full of stew and 
produce something that is so vile it a8racts chaos 
magic and becomes imbued with strange effects.
Such food can be smuggled into cities and hidden in 
or combined with other food with the intention of 
ge8ing as many people as possible to eat some. Mild 
effects would be severe vomiting with those that get 
a full dose might explode into a wild frenzy of 
violence, drop dead on the spot or even sprout chaos 
mutations that drive them to insanity! If left 
unchecked, the effect of a single stew being spread 
across the city can be as devastating as a warband.
It seems a pot of stew (or more than one) has been 
smuggled into the city and chaos cultists, disguised 
as humble pie sellers, have been tainting meat and 
vegetables before selling them around the city. 
Task 1: Find a Pie Seller. The first step is to try to find 
some of the stew in order to trace where it is coming 
from. In each location you move into, you can make 
either an Etique8e or Awareness skill test to find out 
if anyone has been affected. If you fail the roll, move 
to another location and try again. If you succeed you 
have found a ‘survivor’ and can question them to tell 
you who sold them the tainted food. Once you have a 
description you must search for the vendor 
wandering amongst the crowd - make an Awareness, 
Secret Signs or Hunting skill test to see if you can spot 
them. If you fail you should move to another location 
and keep trying. If you succeed, you have found one 
and can confront them!


--- PAGE 354 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
353
Task 2: Food Fight. 
Cultist pie seller  
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Armour:  
None. 
Weapon:  
Club.
Carrying a woven basket full of tainted pies and 
dressed in shabby robes and a worn woollen cloak, 
you spot the cultist approaching a group of peasants, 
evidently intent on trying to spread their poison. You 
must either confront them or try to follow them. If 
you confront them, they will drop their basket and 
fight you desperately (this is not an Unlawful 
Action). Should you defeat them, you can question 
them before they expire - make an Etique8e, Con or 
Leadership skill. If you succeed you have found the 
location of the stew pot (see below). If you fail the 
test, they die without revealing anything useful and 
you must go back to the first step.
If you choose to follow them (instead of fighting), 
make two tests. Firstly, make a Sneaking skill test to 
remain unobserved then make an Awareness skill 
test to keep on the trail. If you fail either of these tests 
you have lost them and must go back to the first step. 
If you succeed you have found the location of the 
stew pot. Drop or roll a dice onto your map to see 
where it has taken you - and where the stew pot is 
hidden. You see your quarry go in and pick up new 
supplies, now it is up to you to investigate.
Task 3: Kitchen Clean up. Down some muddy steps, 
a rough wooden door conceals a dingy cellar. The 
darkness is lit only by a single smoky torch and the 
light of a firepit on top of which a huge iron cauldron 
is bubbling. The stench it gives off is quite 
indescribable and even as you try to cover your nose 
and mouth, you can feel your eyes watering and your 
stomach churning. Next to the pot is a hulking figure 
- an Ogre, but one mutated by the magic of chaos! He 
is surprised by your intrusion but quickly grabs a 
shield. In his other hand is a ladle dripping with 
boiling ogre stew - whatever happens you are going 
to need a wash later.
Chaos Ogre 
SKILL   
7 
STAMINA  
11
Armour:  
Light + Shield. 
Weapon:  
Mace.
In addition to his normal a8ack the Chaos Ogre has a 
severe mutation - where his belly should be, there is 
a grinning mouth with a slavering pink tongue 
hanging from it. Each round this mouth will a8empt 
to spit toxic sludge at you - make a separate a8ack roll 
for it. If it hits you suffer 1 point of STAMINA 
damage, armour provides no protection. 
If the Chaos Ogre or its mouth hit you, you are 
liberally covered in stinking liquid and have a -3 to all 
social skill tests until you can get somewhere to wash 
(such as an Inn or just a river or pond). 
Should you defeat the Chaos Ogre you can a8empt to 
find out where your opponent is lurking by tracing 
the mucky trail of stinking stew. Make a Hunting or 
Awareness skill test to see if you can follow the 
stench. If you succeed, you may Strike at your 
Opponent. Roll or drop a dice onto your map to see 
where you have uncovered them. If you fail, the trail 
has run cold but your opponent is still cooking - it 
turns out they had another pot of stew hidden as a 
backup! You must track this one down too in order to 
consider this mission completed.
Special Reward for Success: The pie sellers of the city 
are extremely grateful for clearing their name. In this 
se8lement you may obtain one free meal (pie of your 
choice) per day in thanks.


--- PAGE 355 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
354
Mission 17: Alchemical Arson
Overview: An alchemist has been employed to make 
and use ‘Filash’s Oil’ a particularly dangerous 
magical substance that, when spread onto a 
flammable material, will cause it to heat up to the 
point of combustion and spread wild searing flames 
onto anything nearby. As a magical oil it can’t be 
easily doused and as a bonus, once it gets started the 
intense flames will occasionally draw Fire Sprites 
from the plane of fire! Clearly, it’s up to find this 
arsonist and put a stop to it. 
This mission plays out differently in the city/
wilderness/dungeon environments, so read carefully 
before you begin. 
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Deal with the Fire (City). As Filash’s Oil is 
unstable, once begun the a8acks will occur daily until 
the alchemist runs out of stock. Roll 1d6 to see when 
it happens - 
1-2  
In the morning
3-4  
In the afternoon
5-6  
At night 
The intense flames create a dark green smoke flecked 
with orange embers which rises in a column from the 
site of burning, so it is easy to see where the problem 
is - drop or roll a dice onto your map to see where the 
arsonist has a8acked. You should head there 
immediately to help out!
Fire is a constant danger for the cities of Titan with 
their many timber-framed houses, so when you 
arrive there will be a scene of agitation. Some people 
will be trying to douse the fire, others gathering tools 
to pull buildings down and make a fire break and the 
majority standing around gossiping and watching. 
Choose one of these options each round.
The fire is treated as having 20 STAMINA points 
which you can damage in a number of ways.
* Join in the bucket chain and do your best to 
douse it. Test against your Thrown skill. If you 
succeed you do 1d3 points of damage to the fire, if 
you fail you have missed with your bucket and the 
fire rages on.
* Get the crowd to help.Test against your 
Leadership skill - if you succeed you do 1d3 points 
of damage to the fire as people step forward to 
help, if you fail no one is willing to take the risk.
* Help cut away parts of the building to make a fire 
break. Test against your Strength skill - if you 
succeed do 1d3 points of damage to the fire, if you 
fail then you haven’t managed to pull away any 
material.
* Use a spell or item that affects fire - you will have 
to decide how much damage it does to the fire - 
bear in mind that it is of powerful magical origin.
Once the fire reaches 0 points of STAMINA you have 
put it out, HOWEVER, trying to put out the fire risks 
summoning a Fire Sprite to defend it. Each round that 
you fight it, roll 1d6. If you roll a one a Fire Sprite has 
appeared and will a8ack you.
Fire Sprite 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
4 
Weapon:  
Touch, does 3 points of STAMINA 
damage if it hits. 
Armour:  
None. 
You cannot fight both the fire and the Fire Sprite, so 
you must deal with these annoyances first before you 
can put out the flames.


--- PAGE 356 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
355
You have 25 rounds to put out the fire; if it is still 
burning on by round 26 then the affected building 
collapses and the crowd disperses, leaving the ruin to 
burn itself out - you cannot try and find the alchemist 
in this case.
Task 2: Find the Arsonist (City): After the fire is out 
you can try and get some information about the 
alchemist. They must have spent some time here 
se8ing the fire and may have even stayed to watch the 
burning, so you can interrogate your fellow 
firefighters to see if they spo8ed anything. For each 
fire you put out, choose a number between 1 and 6, 
then roll a 1d6. If it comes up with your number, 
someone has spo8ed the arsonist and knows where 
to find them! Each time you put out another fire, you 
get to pick an additional number so eventually you 
should catch them (so after three fires you might be 
rolling to get a 2, 4 or 6 and so on), however, the 
alchemist only has enough stock to set five fires. If 
you don’t catch them after fire number five, they have 
eluded you and this mission is failed.
If you do get lucky (or persistent) someone from the 
crowd can lead you to the alchemist's workshop - 
drop or roll a dice onto your map and choose the 
nearest Slum Alley, College or Garbage Heap 
location as the place where they are set up. You can 
head there to confront them.
Task 2: Wilderness: Wildfire is a dangerous prospect 
in the wilds, but li8le can be done other than fleeing 
from the blaze. However, word has reached you that 
an alchemist has set up burn pits in an area of 
wilderness, filling the skies with smoke in an a8empt 
to create some deadly new concoction. Once you 
arrive at the area, the burn pits are easy to spot by the 
columns of smoke rising from them. You choose one 
and head off. Quenching a pit is not complicated - 
you must shovel or move earth onto the fire until you 
put it out. Use your Strength skill to do so; the fire pit 
has 25 ‘STAMINA’ and each successful test of 
Strength does 1d3 points of damage. As above, each 
round you must roll to see if your actions cause a 
wild Fire Sprite to appear (roll 1 on 1d6). Once you 
have covered the burn in dirt, pu8ing it out, you can 
hide nearby and see if the alchemist comes to 
investigate. As above, pick a number between one 
and six and roll 1d6 to see if it matches, choosing an 
extra number each time you deal with a burn pit. If 
you match numbers, the alchemist has come by to 
check on their work and you can confront them. The 
alchemist will not stay for long in this area - you can 
quench four burn pits over four days before they 
become suspicious and move to another area of 
wilderness, meaning the mission is failed.
Task 2: Dungeon: An alchemist has set up a workshop 
in this dungeon hoping to use the other denizens as 
either workers or test subjects. For each room you 
enter, roll 1d6 - on a 1, there is an alchemical 
experiment taking place here (a bubbling cauldron, a 
series of pots with strange liquids, unusual powders 
being milled and so on). After you deal with the 
contents of the room, you can fiddle with the 
experiment. Test your Trap Knowledge or Magic 
Lore skills. If you succeed you have safely ended the 
experiment. If you fail, you take 1d3 points of 
damage as it explodes and a Fire Sprite (see above) 
appears to investigate. Each time you defuse an 
experiment, choose a number between 1 and 6 and 
roll 1d6 - if the numbers match the alchemist is 
nearby and comes running in to see what has 
happened to their work. For each experiment you 
deal with, pick an extra number before rolling the d6.
There will be five experiments in total in the 
dungeon. If you don’t match numbers after dealing 
with all of them, the alchemist has taken the hint and 
fled - the mission has failed.
If you manage to confront them their workshop is 
located in a random room in the next section of the 
dungeon.


--- PAGE 357 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
356
Task 3: Fight the Arsonist.  
Alchemist 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Club + Special. 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
Dressed in a dirty and ta8ered laboratory coat, this 
alchemist has clearly inhaled too many fumes from 
their experiments, which surround her in the 
cramped and stinking workshop (Wilderness: She 
has a cart pulled by a very unhappy looking mule). 
With a mad look, she will defend herself wildly. In 
addition to the normal weapon a8acks the alchemist 
will drop a vial of poison gas. She herself is immune 
but everyone else in her vicinity will suffer a -1 
penalty to SKILL as the choking, stinging fumes get 
into their lungs (she has several of these vials and will 
keep dropping them if you move out of one cloud - 
they all sha8er when she is defeated).
Once defeated you can search her workshop - she has 
kept lab notes detailing her activities including the 
time and place for her to meet your opponent and be 
paid. Sadly they have been wri8en in an alchemist's 
code and you must do your best to interpret it. Make 
a test using Secret Signs or Magic Lore. If you succeed 
you can strike against your opponent - if not, when 
you get to the place all you find is a henchman. 
Your opponents lair will be in the following places: 
City - a random location on your map, Wilderness - 
within half a day’s travel, Dungeon - a random room 
in the next section.
Special Reward for Success: The other alchemists are 
pleased that you have dealt with this rogue and send 
a messenger to you with a package which contains 
two Flash Powder Jars - A small glass vial, sealed, 
contains what appears to be swirling black smoke. If 
hurled to the ground it will fill an area of 5’ radius 
with thick smoke for one round. This allows you to 
withdraw from combat and flee without penalty.
Mission 18: Burrowing Worms
Overview: Your opponent has found a shaman 
capable of breeding and controlling monstrous 
worms capable of burrowing under buildings and 
bursting from the ground to a8ack people! It’s up to 
you to deal with both the worms and their controller.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Kill some worms. 
City: You must do your best to intercept worms and 
find out who is calling them to a8ack. A8acks are 
happening once each day - roll 1d6. 
1-2  
Morning
3-4  
Afternoon
5-6  
Nigh8ime
Each time it begins with vibrations from the ground 
and a low rumbling noise as of distant thunder. Drop 
or roll a dice onto the map to see where the epicentre 
is. As time passes the worm will either continue 
burrowing or surface to a8ack. Each hour roll a 1d6 to 
see what happens: 
1   
Moves north
2 
 
Moves east
3 
 
Moves south
4 
 
Moves west
5-6  
Surfaces to a8ack
You will have to use your judgement to decide which 
location on your map the worm moves to if there is 
more than one choice. If the worm burrows outside 
the city, this a8ack has failed and you must wait for 
another - for a failed a8ack the worm-caller will try 
again within the hour. Once the worm surfaces it will 
thrash around in search for victims to drag away, you 
must do your best to defeat it. 


--- PAGE 358 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
357
Wilderness: An area of wilderness has been infested 
with Sting Worms, making it impassable for 
merchants and driving away the inhabitants - it 
would be highly appreciated if you could come and 
deal with this menace. Once you arrive you can begin 
your patrol - every half day of patrolling lets you test 
Awareness, Hunting or Region Lore skills (pick one) 
to spot a surfacing worm, which you can then fight. 
Dungeon: Finding out that a dungeon is infested with 
giant carnivorous worms would usually be a cause 
for celebration, as they will eat the other inhabitants 
and save you the trouble. However, in this case it has 
been discovered that a shaman is using the dungeon 
as an incubator / nursery for worms he will unleash 
when they are grown. For each section of the 
dungeon a random room will contain some eggs 
guarded by a Sting Worm - you must defeat the 
worm before you can destroy the eggs.
Sting Worm 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Sting, counts as Javelin but with +1 
poison damage 
Armour: Medium. 
These relatives of the Giant Sandworms have been 
enraged and lured by a Worm-caller, who is using a 
magical idol to affect their dim minds.
Task 2: The Worm Caller. You must find and defeat 
the shaman who is controlling these beasts.  
City: Once you defeat a worm make a note of where 
you fought it. When you have defeated three worms, 
you can join the three locations together to make a 
triangle - the Worm-caller is hiding at the location 
which is nearest to the centre of your triangle! You 
should move to this location and search for him. To 
find his hiding spot - which will be a small cavern, 
cave or subterranean spot you must make an 
Awareness skill roll with a target number of 12. As 
you know they must be in this area you can keep 
trying until you find them, each a8empt takes about 
one hour. 
Wilderness: When you have defeated three worms, 
you realise all the worm a8acks are centred around 
one small part of this area. You travel there and start 
searching - use Hunting or Awareness to spot the 
worm-callers hiding spot. Once you find it (each 
a8empt takes half a day, don’t forget encounters) you 
may ba8le the shaman. 
Dungeon: Once you have destroyed three sets of eggs 
the shaman will appear 1d6 rounds later, furious at 
what you have done.
The Worm-caller is a shaman from the wildlands 
who is using a carved idol to call to the worms. He 
knows he will be killed if he is captured, so will a8ack 
you as soon as you find him.
Shaman 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
10 
Devotion:  
4 
Weapon:  
Club 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk and Small Shield.
When a8acked he will use the priestly power ‘Ill 
Luck’ against you, then fight as normal. Once 
defeated you can deal with the carved idol - a crudely 
carved piece of stonework depicting many worms 
writhing together in a knot - which thrums with 
magical power. 
Task 3: Destroying the Idol. The idol you have 
retrieved from the shaman needs to be destroyed 
safely, lest the unleashed magic calls a swarm of Sting 
Worms to a8ack!  You know that to dispose of it 
safely you must take it to a Temple - if you are in a 
city, find one on your map. If you are in the 
wilderness or a dungeon, you will need to return to 


--- PAGE 359 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
358
civilization. Destroying it any other way (by hi8ing it 
with a hammer for example) summons 2d6 Sting 
Worms to a8ack you and prevents you from finding 
your opponent, effectively ending this mission. Once 
at a Temple you can ask the priests to deal with it - 
they are happy to oblige. After you have done this, 
the next night you are granted a dream, showing you 
the location of your opponent's lair (which will be 
somewhere in the same se8lement as the temple). As 
with many visions it is hard to interpret - drop or roll 
TWO dice onto your map to see which locations 
could be indicated by the vision. You must choose 
one to investigate - when you get there you can either 
test your LUCK to see if you are right or roll 1d6 - 1-3 
you were correct, 4-6 you misinterpreted the dream. 
If you have chosen the correct location, you can strike 
at your opponent, if not you must fight a henchman. 
Either way this mission is now complete.
Dungeon: Finding out that a dungeon is infested with 
giant carnivorous worms would usually be a cause 
for celebration, as they will eat the other inhabitants 
and save you the trouble. However, in this case it has 
been discovered that a shaman is using the dungeon 
as an incubator / nursery for worms he will unleash 
when they are grown. For each section of the 
dungeon a random room will contain some eggs 
guarded by a Sting Worm - you must defeat the 
worm before you can destroy the eggs. Once you 
have destroyed three sets of eggs the shaman will 
appear 1d6 rounds later, furious at what you have 
done. When you defeat him, you can take his worm-y 
idol back to a city, town or village to have it destroyed 
at a temple, as described in the ‘city’ mission.
Special Reward for Success: In gratitude for your 
work, local leather workers skin some of the dead 
worms and make you a hardened leather hauberk 
that provides +1 to Armour rolls, it can be sold for 
50gp if you don’t want it. In addition, the worms 
burrowing has opened the entrance to a dungeon 
underneath this se8lement - if you wish to explore it 
you can use the rules described in chapter 5. 
Mission 19: Thieves Abound
Overview: Your Opponent has dispatched cu8hroats, 
purse-men, swindlers and con-men into the world to 
make a misery of everyday life. Crime has become 
rampant and the effects are starting to make everyone 
nervous and uncertain. The nobles are on the brink of 
losing control and whilst they may not be the best 
people, a descent into chaos would be harrowing for 
everyone. You have the opportunity to stop it, by 
spo8ing the criminals and defeating them.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Find some crime. You must do what the watch 
cannot - locate and stop crime. 
City: As you move around the map make an 
Awareness roll or a Sleight of Hand roll (this has a +2 
bonus if you go searching at night - though remember 
to use the nigh8ime encounter tables). If you succeed 
you have spo8ed some illicit activity and can choose 
to go after the criminal..or not. If you decide to ignore 
it, simply move on with your adventures. You should 
roll for encounters as normal in each location, in 
addition to any criminality you spot. 
Wilderness: You have been advised that an area of the 
wilderness has been taken over by brigands that are 
running amok; Once you get to the area you can 
begin to hunt them down. Each day that you spend 
patrolling the area roll for your encounters and make 
up to three (your choice) Awareness or Secret Signs 
skill tests to spot an outlaw. Unlike the encounters in 
the city, the criminals must be fought. 
Dungeon: A dungeon has been invaded by criminals 
who are using it as a hideout and storehouse. In each 
section replace 1d3 of the monsters with criminals 
rolled on the table given, who are drinking, dividing 
the loot or sharpening their weapons.


--- PAGE 360 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
359
Roll 
Activity 
Actions
1-2 
Thugs.  
Following the sounds of a commotion you find that two thugs (SKILL 5 STAMINA 6 
Armour: Light Weapon: Club) are beating up an unfortunate peasant, seemingly just for 
fun.  You may a8ack them or a8empt a Con skill roll to see if you can convince them to 
stop.
3-4 
Cutpurse.  
You spot a cutpurse slyly removing a woman’s purse as she is distracted by his 
accomplice. (Two rogues, SKILL 6 STAMINA 6 Armour: Light Weapon: Dagger)
You may a8ack them or a8empt a Law skill roll to try and rouse some members of the 
Watch to grab them.
5-6 
Burglars.  
Your suspicions about a layabout are confirmed when you see him helping his friend out 
of a window with their loot. Two Burglars (SKILL 6 STAMINA 7 Armour: Light Weapon: 
Club) are a8empting to get away with their swag.  You may a8ack them or a8empt a 
Leadership skill roll to convince bystanders to form a mob and grab them.  If you fail the 
skill roll you may try to a8ack them anyway and stop them by direct means.
Task 2. Gather Tokens. Each time you stop one of 
these crimes you get to search the criminals and find 
out which gang they belong to - 
1-2  
The Pin Boys (always have a large 
copper pin pushed through a part of  
 
their clothing)
3-4  
The Honest John’s (A copper ring 
adorned with a half-penny) 
5-6:  
The Mud Sharks (A sharks tooth worn 
as a pendant). 
As you collect them, note down each token in a list 
numbered one to six. Once you have stopped six 
crimes, it’s time to see if you have worked out which 
gang has been taken over by your Opponent.
City: Drop or roll a dice onto your map and mark the 
nearest location as the site of the hideout you have 
decided to a8ack (It cannot be in the Jail, Keep or 
Wealthy Streets). 
Move there and prepare yourself. Pick one of the 
gangs and then roll 1d6 and compare it to your list of 
tokens - if you have chosen correctly, you get to 
confront your opponent! 
If you have not chosen correctly, you burst in on a 
group of low-lifes that sca8er before your wrath, 
leaping out of windows and down stairways to leave 
you with a room full of upturned tables, spilled 
drinks and abandoned cards and dice. You may 
immediately repeat this mission if you wish, but 
strike out the gang which you have scared off, so only 
two of them are operating. 
Wilderness: As above, the hideout is in the same area 
and takes half a day of travel to reach. 
Dungeon: As above, the hideout is hidden behind a 
secret door in the room where you defeat the sixth 
criminal.
Special Reward for Success: Clearing away some 
criminal behaviour has earned you a favour with The 
Watch. The next time you are asked to roll on the 
Lawbreaker table, you can ignore it.


--- PAGE 361 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
360
Mission 20: Run the Gauntlet
Overview: You have been approached by a nervous 
peasant (no doubt in awe of your heroic status) and 
told that they have a friend who, disgusted by the 
foul deeds they are being asked to carry out,  wishes 
to turn against his employer and become an informer 
- they provide you with a location to meet them and 
li8le else - it could be a trap, but you wouldn’t be a 
hero if you didn’t at least try to help.
Locations: Choose one or roll 1d6: 1-2: City, 3-4: 
Wilderness, 5-6: Dungeon.
Task 1: Meet the Informer.  You must meet up with 
your informer. 
City: Drop or roll a dice onto your map and note the 
nearest Inn, Tavern or Drinking Den - this is where 
you will meet your new friend. Stepping into a back 
room of the inn you see the figure of a man, hunched 
over and lurking in the darkened far corner. Even 
though they are in the shadows, you can tell instantly 
that they are alert and fearful. With a shaking voice 
they ask your name and what your intentions are. 
Once you have reassured them that you are here to 
help, the informer tells you that they have a safe 
house in mind and will tell you everything they know 
once they get there. Unfortunately they are being 
followed - before you get to the safe house you must 
keep them safe whilst they shake off their would be 
assassins. 
Wilderness: Out in the wilds (randomly chosen area) 
an informer waits, fearfully, at a hidden camp. You 
have been given a description and asked to go and 
retrieve them. Once you reach the area, make a 
Region Lore roll to find the camp - you can make 
three a8empts each day until you find it. Once there, 
you pick up the informer and ready yourself to make 
a dash out of the neighbourhood, which is crawling 
with assassins. 
Dungeon: You’ve been asked to complete a simple 
mission - go and retrieve an informer from a location 
described to you. You find the hidden camp but as 
you approach the man the ground gives way! Both 
you and him crash downward into the earth, 
tumbling through the soil until you are deposited in 
a dark chamber deep underground. The path of your 
travel rapidly fills up leaving you and the informer 
with no choice - you’ll have to fight your way back to 
the surface. 
Task 2: Shake the tail. Your informer is being hunted 
- you must take them to safety. 
City:  The wretched peasant will lead you through the 
city until they are satisfied that they are no longer 
being followed, at which point they will lead you to a 
safe house and help you as they can (see rules below). 
They absolutely refuse to tell you the location in 
advance.  
Wilderness: The rules for losing the ‘followers’ are the 
same as for the city, though this time each move 
represents a few hours of travel - roll for encounters 
as appropriate. If you keep your ward long enough to 
lose the trail you will have arrived at a safe house 
hidden in this area. 
Dungeon: Create a dungeon section and place 
yourself and your ward at the start of it. You will 
need to get past 2-4 (1d3+1) dungeon sections to reach 
the exit. Each time you encounter a monster roll 1d6 - 
on a roll of 1, they are accompanied by a Goblin 
Assassin (see table)!
City/Wilderness: Starting from the location where you 
met the informer, you should roll a 1d6 and move to 
your next location accordingly 1 = north, 2 = east, 3 = 
south, 4 = west, 5 = back the way you came, 6 = stop 
and rest for a few minutes. If the result of the roll is 
nonsensical, simply roll again (the informer is 
panicking and doesn’t know which way to turn). 
Each time you come into a new location, you should 


--- PAGE 362 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
361
roll for the normal set of encounters but do 
everything you can to avoid or ignore them - so if you 
meet a friendly NPC you must choose the least time 
consuming option for dialogue. If not, the informer 
will start to panic and decide to take their chances - he 
will run off into the crowd and the mission will fail! 
You may do this mission at night, if you wish.
The informer is not entirely paranoid, and in each 
location (in addition to any normal encounters) you 
need to protect them. Your informer is a coward (they 
will cower behind you) and has STAMINA 10 and no 
armour or shield (if you have some spare you may 
equip him). If they are killed, the mission is a failure. 
You may use magic or healing to heal them and you 
may feed them rations once, but only if you get a 6 on 
the dice to decide which direction to move.
1d6 
A3ack  
Effect
1-2 
Goblin  
A Goblin Assassin bursts from the shadows, intent on  murdering your ward. The goblin
Assassin 
has SKILL 6 STAMINA 6 Armour: Leather Cuirass Weapon:  Handaxe. If they land a
  
 
 
blow, instead of damaging you they damage the informer!
3-4 
Sniper  
An expert crossbowman has been hired to take potshots from the rooftops! Make a test 
against your Awareness skill. If you succeed you have spo8ed them in time and can move 
into cover. If you fail, your informer is hit by a bolt - roll on the crossbow damage table.
5 
Trampled 
With a cry of ‘Yah!Yah!’ the peace of the street is sha8ered as a mounted mercenary 
a8empts to ride down your informer with their charging steed - make a test against your 
Dodge or Acrobatics skill to drag both yourself and your ward out of the way. If you 
succeed, you have leapt clear.If you fail, he has trampled you underhoof. You and the 
informer must roll on the club damage table to see how badly hurt you are. Either way the 
mercenary disappears into the throng as quickly as he appeared, probably seeking 
another place to make a charge.
6 
Clear!  
No ambushes have been laid in this location - take a moment to rest and then move on. 
You may stop and eat rations here.
After you survive each a8ack roll 2d6 and add 3 for 
each location you have passed through (this is 
cumulative - after 2 locations you roll and add 6, after 
3 you roll and add 9 etc). If the total is 25 or more, you 
have reached the safe house and the grateful wretch 
leads you inside where he can spill the beans on your 
opponent. But what, exactly, does he know?
Task 3: Interrogating the Informer. You must get what 
you can from the snitch. City/Wilderness/Dungeon: 
The man, still shaking from his ordeal, is more than 
eager to tell you everything. The problem is in sorting 
the wheat from the chaff to get information you can 
use. Make five rolls using either the Etique8e, Con or 
Leadership skills. Each time you succeed in a test, 
pick a number between one and six. Once you have 
done your five tests, roll 1d6 - if it comes up as one of 
the numbers you picked, you have found a vital piece 
of information  - the current location of your 
opponent.  If, when you roll the 1d6, the number you 
get is not one that you had picked, you have not done 
your interrogation properly and when you arrive at 
the location you must ba8le a henchman instead.
 In the city, your opponent is at a random location, in 
the wilderness they are close by in the same area (half 
a day’s travel) and for the dungeon their lair is 
outside, use the wilderness lair description.
Special Reward for Success: The informer is still 
grateful to you. Pick a se8lement where they live - 
whilst in that se8lement you can contact them for 
information, giving you a +1 bonus to any skill test 
where you need to investigate criminal activity. This 
bonus can be used once each day.


--- PAGE 363 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
362
Mission 21: Rogue Watchmen (City 
Only)
Overview: The peasants are grumbling about the 
behaviour of the Watch - that’s not unusual, but some 
of the rumours you have been hearing indicate that 
there might be a serious problem. People have been 
arrested on trumped up charges and when their 
friends objected, some severe beatings were handed 
out. It looks like some Watchmen have been 
convinced to do a bit of work for the criminals. The 
difficulty is in identifying which of them have gone 
bad and then proving it, without ending up in jail 
yourself.
Task 1: You watch the Watchmen. The first job is to 
watch the watchmen and collect evidence and 
witnesses. Pick a location in the city and move to it. 
Once there, you find a quiet place to observe the 
patrols. Each period of observation will take up half a 
day, during which time you can’t do much else apart 
from mundane tasks (eating, using services available 
at the location you have chosen). Roll 1d6 for each 
half day spent - 
1-4  
The Watch are behaving normally - 
keeping order, supping on small ale,  
 
eating pies. 
5-6  
You spot a patrol acting strangely and 
decide to investigate further. Roll to 
see what they are up to:
1d6 
Suspicious Activity
1-2 
Collecting Rent: This patrol seems to be threatening a stall owner in order to get money from them; it’s 
a classic case of give us the gold or we smash up your stuff. After they have left, you can try to convince 
the stall holder to give you details. Make an Etique8e, Bargain or Con roll to persuade them. If you 
succeed they are willing to come forward and testify, if you fail they are too scared to help you.
3-4 
Oppressing the weak: This group of Watchmen are picking on an unfortunate peasant, giving them a 
hefty beating. They are clearly enjoying it; worried that things are ge8ing out of hand you decide to 
confront them. Make a Law, Con or Leadership roll to bring a stop to it. If you succeed, you have shamed 
them enough that they back off and at least one of this group will help you later on. If you fail, they do 
stop but are unimpressed by your bravado and simply walk off, jeering.
5-6 
Illicit Dealing: This group of Watchmen try to disguise it, but they are clearly meeting up with some 
shady figures. You see them passing out packages in exchange for coin purses to couriers who come by 
semi-regularly. You can make a Sneak, Awareness or Disguise skill roll to get close and overhear what 
deals are being made. If you succeed you get enough details to make an accusation, if you fail they notice 
your snooping and stop their ‘work’ for the day.
Task 2. Convince the Captain. At any point, you can 
move to the Jail location and try to convince the 
Captain of the Watch (who has an impeccable 
reputation for honesty) that he has some ‘bent’ 
Watchmen on his force and that they need to be 
interrogated. 
In order to convince him you need to make a Law or 
Leadership skill roll with a target number of 20. For 
each piece of evidence you have collected (each 
successful roll you made when dealing with the 
suspicious activity) you can add a bonus of +2 to your 
roll. Thus, you must decide how long you spend 
investigating before you present yourself to the 
Captain. If you fail the roll, he is not impressed and 
sends you away - you may only try again after 
collecting more evidence.
Once you succeed, the Captain will round up the 
accused Watchmen and hold a court martial, with 
you invited to present your case. The Captain is 
thorough and dedicated to their job, but not that 


--- PAGE 364 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
363
interested in ba8ling your opponent - you must try to 
get that information yourself. Make a Law, Con or 
Leadership skill roll and take note of the total you get 
(your skill plus your 2d6 roll). This represents the 
amount of information you got from the accused 
about the movements of your opponent. For example 
- if you have a Law skill of 6 and roll 9 on your 2d6 
you have 15 points to spend for the final part.
Task 3: Find your Opponent. Armed with the 
information from the trial (the final fate of the 
Watchmen is the business of the Captain, who asks 
you to leave before he makes that decision) you now 
know something of your opponent's movements. 
Pick any location in the city and move to it. 
Once there, assign as many of your points as you 
wish to, to a maximum of 10, and try to roll less than 
that number on 2d6 (you must decide how many 
points to spend before you make the roll!). If you get 
less than your number you can strike at your 
opponent. If you get more, the information is not as 
good as you had hoped and you have to fight a 
henchman. You may a8empt this at more than one 
location, if you have enough points to do so.
Either way, your accusations and the trial have scared 
any remaining bad apples in the Watch and you will 
need to start a different mission to proceed, but 
convincing the Captain of the Watch to start the court 
martial is sufficient to treat this mission as completed.
Special Reward for Success: All this discussion of the 
Law has given you some insights - if you have 2 or 
fewer points in the Law special skill, you gain one 
point (without having to spend experience points).
Mission 22: Slave Takers
Overview:  Disappearances are not unusual but of 
late, the numbers of those lost to the terrors of the 
night have increased. It is suspected that slave takers 
are on the roam, snatching the unwary and dragging 
them away to serve some brutal master. In the city, 
people are snatched in the dead of night when the 
Watch are sleeping. In the wilds, travellers disappear 
and rumours persist of dungeons in which these 
wretches are forced to labour. Surely a hero can be 
found to put an end to this?
Task 1: Catch them in the act. (Important note: This 
mission happens at night). 
City: Witnesses report muffled cries for help, but are 
too scared to intervene directly. Reports have come in 
from the Tavern, Park, Drinking Den, Garbage Heap, 
Slum Alleys, Graveyard and Theatre locations and 
you must pick one of these to stake-out for the night. 
Move there, then wait. After 1d6 hours, make an 
Awareness or Hunting skill test - if you succeed you 
have spo8ed some suspicious activity, if you fail the 
test your night is fruitless and you must try again 
tomorrow. Either way, remember to roll for 
encounters at your location as normal.  
Wilderness: You have heard that slaves are being 
trafficked in the depths of the night along a forgo8en 
roadway. Reaching the area you find the roadway 
and se8le down to wait for your chance. Note that 
you will need to make night encounters whilst 
waiting here. Each night make an Awareness or 
Hunting roll to see if you have spo8ed any suspicious 
activity - if you fail, you can move along the roadway 
and try again the next night. 
Dungeon: Rumour has it that slaves have been taken 
to this dungeon and set to work, you would be highly 
praised if you could free them. As you move through 
this dungeon, roll 1d6 for each room you enter. On a 


--- PAGE 365 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
364
roll of 1 you find the body of a slave that has been 
worked to death, on a 6 you find a slave still alive that 
you can free. Each living slave will provide you with 
a li8le bit of information - roll 1d3 for each one you 
liberate and keep a track of the total. Once you feel 
you have enough information, roll 4d6 and compare 
it to your total. If the amount rolled is less than or 
equal to your information total and less than 20, you 
have correctly understood where you can find the 
mastermind of this operation and can strike at your 
opponent (their lair is in a random room in the next 
dungeon section). If the total of your 4d6 roll is more 
than your total or 20 or more, your activity has tipped 
them off and you only find a henchman. Either way 
your work has brought an end to the slave taking and 
you can consider this mission complete.
Task 2: Confront the Slavers. You have found the evil-
doers, now it's time to fight them. 
Slave Takers 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
 
Weapon:  
Club (and see description) 
Armour:  
Leather Cuirass and a Small Shield. 
Whilst most people out at night are hurrying quickly 
to their destination, you notice two men sneaking 
along carefully, armed with clubs and nets. Surely 
they are part of the slaver gang you are hunting for. 
Now you must confront them - they are surprised but 
not impressed, simply laughing and pointing out that 
you’ll make a fine slave for the mines.
In the first round of combat they will both sling 
weighted nets - if either of these hit, you are snared 
and suffer a -2 penalty to your combat skill unless 
you spend a round cu8ing or pulling yourself free.
You must fight them together, but after the first Slave 
Taker is defeated, the second one will surrender - 
they offer you information in return for le8ing them 
go free. 
Task 3: Interrogation. Should you accept their 
surrender, you can now roll a test against Etique8e or 
Con to interrogate them. If you fail (or you have 
killed them both), they have lied and you get nothing 
useful. If you succeed, they give you some 
information - make a note of how much you succeed 
by. For example, if your skill roll was 5 and your 
Etique8e skill is 8, you have succeeded by 3. Now you 
must decide if you have enough information to seek 
out the leader. You can keep trying to catch more 
Slave Takers each night to get more information, and 
add together your successes (thus, if you have 
interrogated three times you might have a total of 8 
‘points’ of success). 
Once you feel you have enough, roll 4d6 - if the total 
rolled is less than or equal to your score from 
interrogations and less than 20, you have correctly 
understood where you can find the mastermind of 
this operation and can strike at your opponent. If the 
total of your 4d6 roll is more than your successes or 
20 or more, your activity has tipped them off and you 
only find a henchman. It is thus important to decide 
each night if you feel you have gathered enough 
information. Either way this does bring an end to the 
slave taking - for now - and the mission is completed.
If you are successful in your information gathering 
your opponent is either in a random location on your 
map (city) or hiding somewhere near the roadway 
within one hour's travel (wilderness).
Special Reward for Success: Bringing an end to this 
slavery has earned you a network of contacts and 
helpers and allies in the lower classes. To represent 
this, in your next mission you have a bonus of +8 
which you can share amongst skill tests adding at 
most +2 to any one test (so you could have three 
bonuses of +2, six of +1 or some mixture that adds up 
to +8).


--- PAGE 366 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
365
Mission 23: Shadow War (City Only).
Overview: In public the nobility of the city obey the 
accepted forms of etique8e and courtesy, but behind 
the scenes a vicious shadow war has erupted casting 
all social conventions aside and leaving a bloody trail 
in its wake. A number of well known nobles have 
been killed in duels and violence is spilling over to 
their retainers and households. It’s time for this to 
stop before it spreads further.
Task 1: Spo8ing Trouble. You can’t interfere directly 
with the nobility but you can try to stop their 
employees from fighting.  The best places to spot 
trouble will be the Inn, Tavern, Wealthy Streets, Keep, 
Park or Theatre locations, places where the servants 
of the wealthy are most commonly found. Pick one 
from your map, move there and start to ask around.
Once at your location, make three skill tests from the 
Awareness, Etique8e, Law or Sneaking skills (your 
choice). If you wish to, you can don a disguise to help 
(test against the Disguise skill) or try a li8le bribery 
(test against the Bargain skill at a cost of 1d6gp) and 
if you succeed you gain a bonus of +1 to your tests for 
this location.
If you succeed with two out of three of your tests you 
have got wind of a fight being arranged nearby - the 
investigation takes 1d6 hours.
Task 2: Calm them down. The fight has been 
arranged to happen in a quiet side street with few 
windows overlooking it. You arrive early and conceal 
yourself. You don’t have to wait long until two 
groups of servants appear, one at each end of the 
alley. They are clearly excited and ready for violence. 
You can slip away at this point, if you wish, but to 
stop them you will have to confront them. Stepping 
out you let it be known that they need to either 
disperse or go through you - to make it a ma8er of 
diplomacy or violence.
By diplomacy: You can use Leadership, Con or Law 
skill to make an opposed test against the servants’ 
leaders. They have a SKILL of 6. There is a lot of 
shouting and accusations from both sides, but if you 
beat them in the test you manage to get everyone 
calmed down enough to back down and avoid a fight. 
If you lose the test, it’s time for violence…
By violence: Pausing only to throw their cap to one 
side, a tough looking servant steps up and takes a 
swing at you. Whilst the others watch and cheer, you 
must fight!
1d6 
Which Servant challenges you
1 
Stable Lad 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Club 
Armour:  
Dodge skill 2.
2-4 
Servant 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
9 
Weapon:  
Pitchfork (treat as spear)  
Armour:  
Dodge skill 3.
5-6 
Bodyguard 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
11 
Weapon:  
Sword  
Armour:  
Dodge skill 3.
The servant is brave but not stupid - if reduced to 3 or 
fewer points of STAMINA he will try to surrender 
(though you don’t have to accept - none of this is 
considered an Unlawful Action). Should you win the 
fight, the rest of the peasants get the message and 
change their minds about fighting.
Task 3: Gather Information. The servants have 
calmed down enough to return to their duties, but 
before they leave you do tell you that the fight was 
the result of le8ers the masters of both sides received 
from a mysterious source. This is clearly a person of 
interest to you, but the servants are uncertain about 


--- PAGE 367 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
366
trusting you, no ma8er what you say -  Roll 2d6. If 
you get a 12, you have persuaded them to assist you 
in the next step. For each fight that you break up (you 
may look for one each day) you add one to this roll as 
you gather information about the mysterious le8er 
writer. Once you succeed, a group of servants accept 
that you are trying to help and invite you to wait at 
their masters’ house for the next appearance of the 
messenger, who they are expecting to call that very 
evening. The house is in the Wealthy Streets location 
(drop or roll a dice onto your map and pick the 
nearest one). They hide you in the servants quarters 
where you can see the messenger arrive and deliver 
the latest note, then it’s up to you to follow them.
Task 4: On the trail. Now you have a chance to follow 
the messenger, whoever she is, the messenger knows 
that they are up to no good and it is quickly apparent 
she has protection in the form of a group of three 
thugs that fall in step with her. From the location you 
start, roll to see what direction she takes -  (roll 1d6 - 
1=north, 2=east, 3=south, 4=west, 5,6 roll again. If the 
direction is outside the city, move left (1-3) or right 
(4-6) along the boundary of the city) then make an 
Awareness or Hunting skill test with a +3 bonus to 
see if you can keep up. If you fail the Awareness test 
you can either test your LUCK to see if you can pick 
up the trail again, or must go back to the step above 
and convince another group of servants to help you 
(you keep your bonuses for the 2d6 roll to see if you 
can get their help).
In addition, for each location you move through you 
should roll for the usual encounters AND make a test 
against your Sneaking or Disguise skill - if you fail 
this test the messenger sends one of her thugs to 
a8ack you!
Thug 
SKILL   
5 
STAMINA  
6 
Weapon:  
Dagger 
Armour:  
Dodge skill 3. 
Probably dragged from a prison cell, this scrawny 
man looks on the verge of starvation. Slashing the air 
in front of them they advance malevolently.
The messenger will move through five locations 
before they get to their destination - but is it where 
your opponent is waiting or have they been 
forewarned? Roll 2d6. 
For each Thug you fought (due to failing your 
Sneaking skill test) and for each Challenge encounter 
you faced along the way add one to your total. If your 
total is 10 or less, you get to strike at your opponent! 
If your total is 11 or more, the messenger sent one of 
her thugs to run ahead and warn her employer, and 
you get to fight a henchman. Either way, you have 
done enough to end the shadow war for now (the 
nobility are always looking for an excuse to a8ack 
each other) and this mission is completed.
Special Reward for Success: The nobles involved are 
grateful for your intervention but also embarrassed 
by the whole affair, they send a magistrate to discuss 
it with you. He offers you 5d6gp in return for your 
silence, plus a once only use of his services. Once 
only, you may choose to ignore the result of a roll on 
the Lawbreaker table as he intervenes on your behalf.


--- PAGE 368 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
367
Mission 24: Masks of Terror (City Only)
Overview: 
Southern 
Mask 
Magic 
is 
usually 
employed to provide some kind of benefit or 
protection to the wearer of the mask, but as with all 
types of magic it can be turned to evil ends. In 
particular the creation of a ‘Face of Slangg’ mask is a 
terrible use of the mask-maker’s skills. When a ‘Face 
of Slangg’ mask is created an individual or group (for 
example, Count Tyrn and his household) is chosen as 
the target. When the mask is donned, a great hatred 
overcomes the wearer and they will set all their mind 
and will to destroying the target. Although the mask 
can be removed - it leaves behind a distinctive set of 
facial scars, recognisable to anyone familiar with 
Mask Magic - the hatred remains until the wearer 
dies or completes their task. For these reasons the 
‘Face of Slangg’ mask is a powerful means of 
ensuring a hired assassin carries out their mission.
In this case it seems several noble houses are using 
these masks to send out thugs - probably dredged 
from the slums or jails - out to a8ack each other. As 
these a8acks involve violence on the streets, with the 
servants and retainers being a8acked, it is time for 
heroes to step in and put a stop to it.
Task 1: Find a Thug. To start with, pick a location that 
must be one of the Marketplace, Wealthy Street, 
Street, City Gate (Wall) or Park. Move there and stake 
it out, waiting to see if you can spot a masked thug. 
After 1d6 hours of observation, make an Awareness 
or Secret signs skill roll. You may make one roll per 
location each day. Should you succeed you have 
spo8ed someone wearing the distinctive mask and 
can confront them.
Masked Thug 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Dagger 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
Special: The Masked Thug is determined to get on 
with their mission and will try to get away: Anytime 
they win a round of combat  they will try and dance 
away through the crowd - make an opposed test 
using either Acrobatics, Climb or Dodge skill - the 
Masked Thug has a skill of 6 - to see if you can keep 
up with them. If they win twice in a row, they have 
go8en away and you must start your search again.
Task 2: Unmask the Crafter. For every thug you 
defeat you can recover a ‘Face of Slangg’ mask and 
examine it. Like an artist every mask maker has their 
own unique methods, so with enough masks you 
should be able to work out who is responsible. For 
each mask make a Magic Lore or Evaluate skill test - 
if you succeed you recover 1d3 pieces of evidence 
(small pieces of worked metal, scraps of pa8erned 
wood or fabric and so on) that can help you. When 
you have 6 pieces, you can take them to the 
Marketplace location to discuss them with the 
merchants there (obviously this can only be done 
during the day).
Mask-makers are not city dwellers but the merchants 
can, for a fee, tell you who is dealing in these goods. 
Make an opposed Bargain skill roll against the 
merchants - treat them as having a Bargain skill of 9. 
The base fee they charge is 1d6gp and for each point 
they beat you by, the fee increases by another 2gp. If 
you don’t (or can’t) pay the fee you will have to 
abandon this mission and treat it as failed (if you 
need a few days to obtain the gold the merchants 
don’t mind waiting). 
The merchants tell you, in strict confidence, that 
goods are brought in through the city gates at night 
by bribing the gatekeepers. They tell you when the 
next shipment is due but warn you to wait until the 
goods are inside as they don’t want to implicate the 
gatekeeper and get in conflict with the Watch. Pick 
one of your city gates at random. The shipment will 
arrive at night (adjust your encounters accordingly) 
and you will need to get in place and wait for it.


--- PAGE 369 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
368
Task 3: Catch the Courier. Using the information 
provided by the merchants, you lie in wait for the 
courier.  
Mask Courier 
SKILL   
6 
STAMINA  
8 
Weapon:  
Sword 
Armour:  
Leather Hauberk. 
There is no difficulty picking out the courier - he is 
carrying a large pack, looking around nervously and 
is one of the few people let in through the gates after 
dark. As with the Masked Thugs he will try to get 
away from you - if he wins two rounds of combat 
make an opposed test using Acrobatics, Climb or 
Dodge skill - the courier has a skill of 6 - and if he 
wins he dashes into the darkness! 
Unless you have a means to stop him you will have to 
start the whole process again, as they are sure to 
change their supplier after this close call!
However, should you defeat the courier, he has on his 
person a le8er giving the location for his delivery - 
you should drop or roll a dice onto the map to see 
where it is - and provided you go there within one 
day you will be able to strike at your opponent. If you 
leave it any later they have moved on, though you 
can still count the mission as completed.
Special Reward for Success: You’ve probably saved 
the life of a noble or two by bringing an end to this 
plot and they are grateful, speaking highly of you. If 
you are using the social rank system (section 7.2) you 
may roll for promotion to a higher rank. If you are not 
using that system, you receive 5d6gp as a reward.
Summary
Whilst the bulk of this book is intended to help you 
build maps, enemies and quests of your own, these 
example missions should give you some tips and 
ideas about how to create adventures that involve a 
mixture of tasks - not just combat, but using other 
skills and other tests to determine how the mission 
plays out. You should feel free to use them as wri8en, 
or take out the pieces that you like and bring them 
into other quests and adventures.
You can of course plan out the various tasks 
beforehand if you wish, or you could add the next 
task on as the previous one is completed.  It is good to 
try and connect these so that they make a certain 
sense when assembled together into an ongoing 
story. 


--- PAGE 370 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
369
10.2 Creating Quests & Missions
Much of this book is dedicated to helping you bring 
your world to life by creating maps for you to journey 
through and encounters to challenge your heroes. In 
this section we focus on how to create your own 
quests and missions, providing tips, ideas and 
options that will help you come up with the type of 
missions that you and your group will enjoy.
It should be emphasised that creating your own 
adventures is a skill that takes time to develop - there 
is no magic formula to produce them. Because of that 
everything in this section should be seen as optional 
and advisory - you should read through it and use the 
parts you like, rather than treat it as a system that 
forces you down a rigid path.
Wanderer, Quester, Hero
How your heroes approach the world is up to you 
and your Director.  In this book we have given you 
the tools to create se8lements, dungeons and 
wilderness 
environments 
to 
explore, endlessly. That means 
that your heroes can wander the 
world, finding challenges in the 
random 
encounters 
of 
the 
wilderness 
of 
delving 
into 
increasingly wicked dungeons. 
There is nothing wrong with this 
approach, sometimes called a 
hex crawl or dungeon crawl 
(and with this book, a city 
crawl), and it can be a nice way 
of expanding your map and 
discovering new areas.
A different option is to create 
quests and missions for your 
heroes to carry out. Unlike a 
crawl, the missions will have an 
objective and a series of tasks of 
challenges to overcome.
In this section we will be se8ing out some ideas on 
how to create your own quests and missions and 
provide you with a system to help generate them 
randomly. Whether you design your own from 
scratch or use the random generation to provide cues 
and ideas, pu8ing everything together into a 
coherent whole will require some imagination on 
your part. The pre-wri8en missions provided earlier 
in this chapter give you some examples of how to do 
that.
Another way of using this book is to combine these 
two approaches and mix up wandering with a small 
amount of quests - in that scenario as your hero enters 
a se8lement, dungeon or wilderness area they should 
choose or randomly generate a number of tasks and 
objectives to complete there. It might be that you 
decide to complete three tasks every time you come 
to a city, one task in each wilderness area or dungeon 
section. Combining these into a coherent story can be 
a challenge, but this method has 
the advantage of needing very 
li8le preparation.
Remember that when carrying 
out missions and quests you still 
have to check for random 
encounters 
and 
deal 
with 
environmental hazards as usual. 
If your quest requires you to find 
a dungeon and explore it, you 
should 
still 
work 
out 
the 
encounters you have in the 
wilderness as you travel there, 
and populate your dungeon 
with monsters as normal. In 
other words, your missions and 
quests happen ‘on top’ of 
whatever you would meet by 
wandering.


--- PAGE 371 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
370
Creating a Mission, Adventure or Quest
There are many ways to go about designing your 
missions, ranging from simply le8ing them develop 
by chance as your hero wanders the world to 
intricately plo8ing a lengthy series of adventures 
with distinct chapters that need to be worked 
through in order, often called a campaign. We can 
start by asking ourselves a series of questions such as:
• What would my heroes be interested in doing? 
Are they sell-swords looking for a fight, priests 
hoping to impress their god or mages seeking 
ancient knowledge?
• What is going on in the world? Is it of interest to 
the heroes or will they ignore it?
• Once a quest is started, what is the overall 
objective? (save the kingdom, earn gold, defeat the 
villain?)
• What can the hero do to achieve that? What is 
their first step?
• What do the heroes know? What information is 
hidden from them?
• Where is the action happening? In a city, a 
dungeon or the wilderness, or some combination 
of these?
• Who or what is helping or hindering the heroes? 
Do they have allies?
• What happens if I fail part of the quest? Does it 
fail completely, or is it merely a setback?
• If I succeed, what happens next? Is it the end of 
that adventure, or just the end of one part of it?
Based on this we can start breaking down an overall 
quest (such as ‘save the kingdom’) into smaller parts 
- the first step might be something as simple as 
visiting locations around a city to find out what 
people think is going wrong, leading to a 
confrontation with an evil doer. You don’t have to 
work out the full campaign all at the start!
As you can see at the lowest level a campaign breaks 
down into a series of quests and adventures, which in 
turn break down into a series of tasks and objectives. 
Gathering information is a task with the objective of 
learning something important, chasing a goblin 
across rooftops is a task with the objective of fighting 
or capturing it, fighting a group of orcs is a task with 
the objective of surviving and protecting others. 
Further on in this section we provide a list of tasks 
that can be used to build missions and adventures, 
based largely on the special skills listed in the 
Advanced Fighting Fantasy rulebook. The intention 
is that you use these as ‘ingredients’ to help you make 
a satisfying feast of adventure. It is up to you and 
your Director to build these pieces into a full, 
coherent mission, always remembering that your 
imagination takes precedence over anything wri8en 
in this book and the ultimate intention is to have fun!
To help start your imagination, we can look at quest 
hooks, villains, hero motivations, mission difficulty 
and specific tasks, with some additional ideas given 
at the end of this section about how to make your 
adventures more intricate and challenging.
The Quest Hook
 If the world is peaceful and quiet, there is li8le for the 
hero to do. The quest hook is the initial event of 
circumstance that disrupts that calm and provides a 
reason to design and create quests. This is just as 
important to the Director as it is for the hero, as the 
quest hook should be important in helping you to 
decide what sort of challenges to place before your 
heroes and where the action should take place.


--- PAGE 372 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
371
Of course, there are many ways to deal with most 
problems. A rampaging monster could be dealt with 
by finding it and fighting it, but the heroes could also 
try and trap it, lure it away from the area, or convince 
the king to send troops out to deal with it. The 
descriptions are deliberately left somewhat vague 
and open to interpretation.
Table 10.2.1 What is Happening - the Quest Hook
1d6 
1d6 
Description
1-2 
1 
A powerful magical item or weapon has been found, it must not fall into the wrong hands - 
perhaps you could retrieve it?
 
2 
A wizard has been causing problems by terrorising the common folk with their powers, you 
should find a way to stop them (peacefully or not).
 
3 
Two nearby kingdoms have been tricked into starting a war and the bloodshed is escalating. 
Perhaps there is a way to stop this madness?
 
4 
Rumour has it that a mystery ruin, full of treasures and monsters, has been discovered. Who will 
be the first to explore its depths?
 
5 
A strange disturbance in the winds of magic indicates the arrival of a powerful new force - what 
could it be? You should ensure it doesn’t fall into the wrong hands.
 
6 
Powerful forces have threatened you and your loved ones unless you do as they ask - the only 
way to find out who is behind this is to play along for a while.
3-4 
1 
You have come into the possession of a map, showing the location of something important - 
perhaps treasure, perhaps something more unusual. Your interest is piqued.
 
2 
Worshippers of two different gods have clashed and the conflict has descended into violence, 
someone needs to convince or force them to stop.
 
3 
Cultists are seeking to fulfil a terrible ancient prophecy, who knows what will happen if they 
succeed. It would be best if you stopped them.
 
4 
An evil church is recruiting people to serve its dark master, every day more people join its ranks. 
You should find a way to stop this insanity.
 
5 
A powerful monster or person is on a rampage of violence and destruction. You should find them 
and bring them down.
 
6 
Stores of grain and other foodstuffs have been poisoned or destroyed just as winter approaches - 
the peasants will starve if this continues. Who could have done such a thing and why?
5-6 
1 
A mercenary group has been hired to cause trouble, you should find out what’s behind this.
 
2 
Travellers have reported strange goings and disappearances in the wilds, everyone would feel 
safer if somebody investigated it.
 
3 
An unnatural pestilence is sweeping the land. Is it simply misfortune or is there something 
sinister behind it?
 
4 
A large quantity of gold & gems has been stolen from the king - who will retrieve it?
 
5 
A powerful noble has been killed in suspicious circumstances causing uproar and fingers are 
being pointed; unless answers are found violence seems inevitable.
 
6 
Someone or something precious to you has been taken and you intend to get it back.


--- PAGE 373 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
372
Who is behind it all?
Everything happens for a reason, or so we are told. In 
Chapter 9 we have covered the creation of villains - 
your adversary that is behind the problems your hero 
has to face and in section 7.2 we have also provided 
rules for creating factions, if you would prefer to fight 
against a whole group of enemies rather than a single 
opponent.
It is generally best to work out at the start who you 
are dealing with, either by creating an adversary or 
using one of the examples given in section 9.1. Not 
only will this give you an ultimate objective to work 
towards, but also help you set the tone for your 
campaign. If your opponent is an evil mage, you can 
include elements of trickery and magic use into your 
adventures whereas an orc warlord is more likely to 
deal in violence and bloodshed. 
You can take a ‘wait and see’ approach and see how 
your missions develop but this can also make it more 
difficult to design your campaign in a coherent way.
 Either way, the Director is under 
no obligation to tell the heroes who 
the villain is at the start -  saving 
that information for later on can 
give you a satisfying moment of 
discovery.
Hero’s Motivation
Why does your hero get out of bed, 
grab their weapons or spellbooks 
and head out into danger? What 
motivates them? Even if you 
happen to be aware that a huge 
chaos warped ogre is destroying 
villages nearby, does that mean it 
should be you that deals with the 
problem?
You may already have a motivation 
for your hero. They may wish to be 
the greatest knight the world has 
seen, or the wisest sage, or perhaps 
they just want to live the life of an 
adventurer. If they already know 
why they are going to take action 
you don’t need to roll on this table, 
but if you are struggling to describe 
a motivation you can roll or choose 
one from the list below.


--- PAGE 374 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
373
Table 10.2.2 Why is it your problem? 
1d6 
1d6 
Hero’s Motivation
1-2 
1 
You heard about the problem and decided to deal with it, because that’s what heroes do.
 
2 
A noble has made it clear that it’s your problem and not dealing with it would be a very bad idea.
 
3 
It was the dying wish of a friend that you take action.
 
4 
A secretive organisation has contacted you asking that you provide your aid.
 
5 
You received a vision in which a powerful entity, possibly a god, commanded you to take action.
 
6 
You received a message saying that your life was in danger if you failed to act. You don’t know 
who is threatening you, but you need to find out.
3-4 
1 
There is no one else to turn to, all desperate eyes turn to you. Will you ignore their pleading?
 
2 
You believe the problems are caused by an ancient foe of your people.
 
3 
You have heard that a great quantity of gold is at stake.
 
4 
The priesthood of your religion has demanded that something is done.
 
5 
You have been accused of causing the problem! The best way to clear your name is to find out 
who is behind it.
 
6 
The question of who is causing these problems fascinates you; you feel compelled to find out.
5-6 
1 
You have trained with steel and magic for long enough, it’s time to test yourself properly.
 
2 
Your honour is at stake; you must act or live in shame.
 
3 
Why do people do anything? Taking up this challenge is just another way to fill your time.
 
4 
You seek fame or notoriety, acting the hero is a good start!
 
5 
You want to be known as the best at what you do. Dealing with this problem will be a way to 
prove that.
 
6 
Romance is in the air, acting the hero is bound to impress the object of your desire.
Breaking down Adventures into Missions and 
Mission Difficulty
When working out your quests and missions you 
don’t need to design the whole campaign from start 
to finish in one go! It is nearly always be8er to break 
things down into manageable chunks which will 
make it a lot easier for you to design each part. This 
approach helps you get started and you may well 
find that once you work out the details of your first 
mission, the others follow on naturally.
One way to do this is to write out a series of objectives 
or plot points; each one should represent either a 
single mission or group of missions for your heroes.
As an example, consider a hero that is faced with the 
quest hook ‘An unnatural pestilence is sweeping the 
land. Is it simply misfortune or is there something 
sinister behind it?’
The overall objective is clear - find out who or what is 
causing this disease and stop it - but it is difficult to 
come up with one quest or adventure that 
encompasses that. Instead, we can create a series of 
missions by breaking it down into smaller steps:
Step 1: Investigate the disease. The Director decides 
that this is going to be a fairly easy section of the 
mission, to get the hero started on their quest. They 
assign it two to three tasks, focused on healing and 
social skills and one fight at the end (when the hero 
finds a ghoul spreading the plague). 
Step 2: Find out where the ghoul came from and how 
it got to the village. The Director makes this step 
longer, with five or six tasks and a couple of fights as 
the hero discovers that the ghouls are being brought 
into the villages at night by a group of orcs.


--- PAGE 375 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
374
Step 3: The final step is much longer, in which the 
hero must track the orcs out into the wilderness, find 
their lair (a large dungeon), ba8le their way through 
it and confront the leader (an evil priest of death).
In general, the duration and difficulty of each mission 
should relate to the rewards. A short, easy mission 
allows the hero to make a li8le progress in their 
overall quest, a longer mission should provide 
something more substantial and bring the hero closer 
to their goal.
A Director can sit down and write out all the steps 
right at the start, or they can build the quest step-by-
step, working out the next stage after they have seen 
how the hero copes with each mission. Either 
approach works perfectly well and most Directors 
tend to adopt a mixture of improvisation and 
preparation.
Whilst the overall objective of a series of quests 
remains the same (deal with the big problem facing 
the hero) some examples of typical mission objectives 
can help you get started in planning it out if you are 
struggling for inspiration.
Table 10.2.3 Typical mission objectives
1d6 
Description of objective
1 
Defeat a significant enemy: At the end of the mission you will fight a notable foe, an ally or henchman of 
the villain. This will weaken your opponent or reveal some significant new piece of information.
2 
Travel to an important place: The objective of this mission is for your hero to travel to where they need 
to be to continue their quest. Of course, such a journey can be hazardous and include other objectives 
along the way.
3 
Acquire a notable object: By the end of this mission you will have acquired an item which will either help 
you or, by removing it from them, hinder your opponent. The object will almost certainly be heavily 
guarded.
4 
Avoid a terrible fate: Something terrible is about to occur and only by carrying out this mission can your 
hero either prevent it from happening or at least escape from it themselves.
5 
Find a significant clue: By carrying out this mission you will uncover a piece of information or clue that 
will help you decide what to do next.
6 
Obtain an ally: Along the way your heroic actions will result in you gaining an ally. Exactly how they 
help you (information, gold, magic, force of arms…) is up to you.
Combat isn’t Everything….
But it is quite important! As you build your missions 
up, you will need to decide how much combat you 
want to include. Not every mission has to include 
fighting - it might be that what your hero needs to do 
involves talking to people, travelling somewhere, 
reading ancient scrolls or even going fishing. 
The amount of combat you include will change the 
feel and nature of your campaign and if your heroes 
are designed to fight, they may find a lack of it 
frustrating. On the other hand, if you have too much 
it can start to feel like a monster treadmill.
In the end you will need to find a balance between 
combat and non-combat tasks, but you should try to 
include at least some - fighting monsters is, after all, 
at the heart of Advanced Fighting Fantasy.
Taking a broad view, we can describe the missions as 
easy, moderate or hard and include some guidelines 
for how many combats should be faced.


--- PAGE 376 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
375
Table 10.2.4 Breakdown of missions by difficulty and some broad parameters
Difficulty 
Mission  
Duration (time for long  
Combats** 
What is gained
Points*  
distance travel not included)
Easy 
 
5-10 
 
A few days to a week  
1-3 
 
A small objective such as a minor 
clue, confrontation with a lackey or 
weak monster, or a small amount of 
gold.
Moderate 
11-20  
Up to a few weeks 
 
3-5 
 
Noticeable progress towards your 
overall goal. A significant piece of 
information, 
a 
henchman 
or 
important monster killed, a decent 
piece of treasure or sum of gold 
earned.
Hard  
20+ 
 
Up to a month or longer  
6+ 
 
Either major progress towards your 
goal or completion - discovering 
major 
elements 
of 
the 
story, 
confronting your opponent or some 
of their important lackeys, obtaining 
a useful treasure or large sum of 
gold.
* See section below on specific tasks for explanation of mission points
** These can be included with the other tasks or added in once you have worked out the mission structure, remember you 
will find things to fight in the environment as you explore.
Specific Tasks 
To help create a mission or adventure, it can be 
helpful to break it down into smaller pieces - specific 
tasks and associated objectives. A list of tasks can 
then be assembled into something more dynamic and 
engaging, but having that start point is a very useful 
way to fire up your imagination.
In this section we provide a list of tasks related to 
different areas of the game, particularly the use of 
special skills. The purpose is that you should look 
through the list and choose a number of these to help 
you build up a coherent mission.
To help you, they are divided into themes - combat, 
movement, 
subterfuge, 
knowledge, 
diplomacy, 
magic, religion, general and exploration. You could 
choose to pick all the individual tasks from one group 
or mix and match. If you want to, you can roll the dice 
and obtain random themes though you might want to 
choose one main theme to pick most of the tasks from 
and then mix in some from other areas. 
For example, you could build a mission around the 
idea of ‘diplomacy’ in which you take three or four 
tasks from that area and then include some from 
other areas such as subterfuge, knowledge, religion 
or so on. In addition to this - don’t forget the combat! 
There is always an opportunity to include a fight (or 
two or three) in any adventure, and whilst there are 
many dangers in the world of Titan a lot of the risk 
lies in fighting the monsters. We very much 
recommend that you include at least a few combats in 
almost any mission - there are plenty of monsters to 
choose from.


--- PAGE 377 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
376
Mission Points. Some 
of the tasks are 
easier and faster, 
some are harder. To 
represent this, each 
of 
them 
has 
a 
suggested number 
of ‘mission points’ 
to 
indicate 
how 
difficult they are. 
You can tally them 
up to give you a 
rough indication of 
how 
hard 
the 
overall task is or just 
use it as a guide to 
help 
you 
decide 
which tasks your 
heroes 
should 
a8empt. 
Broadly 
speaking 
an 
easy 
mission 
should equate to 
about 5-10 mission 
points, 
a 
moderately 
hard 
mission should be 
around 
11-20 
mission points and 
a hard mission will be 20 or more. 
Clearly these are only rough guidelines to help you 
decide how much effort your heroes should have to 
put in to make progress in their overall quest.
Once you have made your choices or rolled the dice, 
we strongly recommend that you take a few moments 
to work the suggestions into something coherent - a 
mission which makes sense. You should feel free to 
remove, add, rewrite or rearrange the parts so that 
you end up with something which is challenging, 
interesting and intelligible. Don’t be afraid to scrap 
something and start 
again if you feel it is 
hopeless!
Don’t 
forget 
your 
environment! 
The 
missions are set in 
cities, dungeons or 
the wilderness and 
just because you are 
busy 
chasing 
a 
goblin 
courier 
across the rooftops 
it doesn’t mean you 
can ignore the other 
hazards 
and 
challenges 
that 
surround 
you. 
Maybe you’ll run 
into 
something 
helpful, or perhaps 
it 
will 
be 
a 
challenge. 
Either 
way, you should 
remember that you 
have to deal with 
your surroundings 
as well as the bigger 
problem.
Location, Location, Location. Not every task can be 
completed in every type of environment. If, for 
example, you have been set the job of visiting 5 
friendly traders (to find out who is buying up all the 
weapons recently) it is probably impossible to do this 
in a dungeon and extremely time consuming to do it 
in the wilderness! Each task has a list of 
recommended locations - you might want to keep all 
the tasks in one mission in the same place, 
particularly for short, easy missions. As with 
everything in this section, you will need to interpret 
the suggestions so they make sense.


--- PAGE 378 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
377
Table 10.2.5 Randomised Task Categories - 
Pick a theme for your mission or roll on the table below to come up with some ideas - it’s up to you to 
assemble them into something that makes sense.
1d6 
1d6 
Task Category & Description
1-2 
1-4 
Combat. Tasks that involve fighting one or more opponents. Choose something that is 
appropriate for your mission and the power of your hero or look at the advice given below about 
‘monsters’. Combat tasks are generally straightforward, can be included in any mission and are 
often the final task of a mission, as the hero ba8les to defeat the cause of the problem.
 
5 
Magic. A smaller category of tasks in which you rely on your knowledge of magic to make 
progress. Heroes without any magical ability may wish to avoid this category entirely.
 
6 
Religion. On Titan, everyone has some knowledge of the gods and priests and temples are 
important parts of life. Your ability to recognise the different religions and know how to interact 
with them could be vital.
3-4 
1-2 
Knowledge. Tasks that test your learning and lore, often favoured by magic users. Advancing 
your quest by finding out more information can be far quicker than using brute force.
 
3-4 
Diplomacy. Tasks that involve using your social skills to convince, persuade, impress or lie to 
people. Success or failure can be critical to your mission as you either recover vital information 
or get the people on your side.
 
5-6 
General. Tasks that revolve around day-to-day activities or incidents, things that are not covered 
by specific skills and challenges that most heroes should be able to have a go at. Objectives are 
varied but usually amount to some useful but not major progress in your mission.
5-6 
1-2 
Movement. Tasks that involve displays of athleticism, such as running, jumping or climbing. Can 
be a challenge for heavily armoured heroes, movement tasks let you pass obstacles, chase down 
enemies or just show off your skills. 
 
3-4 
Subterfuge. A bit of deception and trickery can often be the best way to achieve your goals. Being 
able to outwit your enemies may be the only way to lure them into open combat.
 
5-6 
Exploration. With a whole world to explore, why not get out and see what you can find? Often, 
merchants and nobles will be willing to pay heroes to go into the dangerous wilderness and deal 
with a problem. 
Failing a task
If your hero fails at a task, what happens? It doesn’t 
mean the overall mission or quest has to be 
abandoned, just that you need to find another 
solution to your problem. In the later part of this 
section we provide some rules for ‘setbacks’ that your 
hero can suffer because of their failure, but a simple 
solution is to take on another task from the same 
category. So, if your hero fails a ‘diplomacy’ task, find 
another task that you feel could substitute for it.
Other skills not covered: Additional skills are listed in 
other rulebooks, such as the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy Combat Companion containing the skill 
‘Monster Lore’. We have only covered skills listed in 
the core rulebook, but you should make use of the 
skills and abilities listed in the other books if you 
have them. Looking at the task descriptions given in 
this section should give you plenty of ideas about 
other tasks and objectives you can come up with.


--- PAGE 379 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
378
Combat Tasks
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. A tough combat is often the final task of 
a mission.
Table 10.2.6 Randomised Combat Tasks
1d6 
1d6 
Task Description
1-2 
1-6 
Fight a monster: Find a monster that is appropriate for your hero or use the methods detailed at 
the end of this section to generate one. It has the usual equipment, treasure and methods of a8ack. 
If you flee, the task is failed. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 1. 
3-4 
1-2 
Fight 1d6 opponents in waves: You have found yourself the target of a8ack and must defeat a 
number of monsters to proceed. They can be one type of monster or a mixture. The order you 
fight them is based on how many there are. Roll 1d6 and then fight the groups as follows: 1 - fight 
alone. 2 - fight separately. 3 - fight one, and then two together. 4 - fight two pairs. 5 - fight one and 
then two pairs. 6 - fight one, then two, then three together. You have one round of rest between 
each set of monsters and you may use that to flee (though this means the task is failed and you 
suffer a setback).  Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 3. 
3-4 
Display of Skill: You have entered into a tournament or contest in which non-lethal blows are 
struck and the outcome is decided by displays of skill (an archery contest, a melee with training 
weapons and so on). You have been matched with someone of similar skill to your own. Take 
your highest combat special skill and add 6 to it; this is your opponent's total (So, if your hero has 
SKILL 7 and 3 points in Polearms, your opponent has a combat special skill of 6+3 = 9). Now make 
10 opposed combat rolls to see how many times you win - you must win 5 times to succeed with 
this task. If you fail, you suffer a setback. If you succeed you are awarded a prize of 2d6gp and 
may continue with your quest. The contest takes half a day. Locations: City. Mission Points: 1. 
5-6 
Fight a Henchman: You have come across a Henchman of your Opponent and must fight them. 
Refer to the details for your particular Opponent. If you are not fighting against a specific villain 
you can still use Table 9.2.7 'Villain's Henchman’ to create one. Defeating them should give some 
interesting or useful progress to your quest. If you flee, this task is failed. Locations: City, 
Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2. 
5-6 
1-3 
Fight an ‘enhanced’ opponent: Find a monster that is appropriate for your hero or use the 
methods detailed at the end of this section to generate one. It is an experienced combatant and +1 
to its combat, damage and armour rolls. If you flee, the task is failed. Locations: City, Wilderness, 
Dungeon. Mission Points: 1. 
4-5 
Fight 1+1d2 easy opponents: Find a monster that is appropriate for your hero or use the methods 
detailed at the end of this section to generate one. They are slightly weaker (or already injured) 
and have a -1 penalty to their combat, damage and armour rolls, but you must fight them all at 
once. If you flee, the task is failed. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2. 
 
6 
Confront your Opponent! - You are suddenly, and quite by chance, confronted by your 
Opponent, the villain behind all the problems. Perhaps you stumble upon them at a meeting, or 
maybe they have sought you out. Either way, you must now fight them. The usual rules apply for 
a confrontation and you should remind yourself of them before the fight begins. If you defeat 
them completely, this is probably the end of your mission! If you flee, this task is failed. Locations: 
City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 3 or the end of your quest. 


--- PAGE 380 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
379
Magic
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. It is likely that only heroes who have 
some skill in MAGIC will be able to a8empt these.
Table 10.2.7 Randomised Magic Tasks
1d6 
Description
1-2 
Magic Lore - Research: You need to uncover a piece of forgo8en magical knowledge, vital to your quest. 
Make 1d6+3 Magic Lore skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. Each test requires a whole 
day of intense study. If you have access to a library (for example, at the College location in a se8lement) 
you can add a +2 bonus to your skill tests. If you fail the task you have misunderstood your research and 
come to the wrong conclusion. You can a8empt this task again (once). Locations: City. Mission Points: 2.
3-4 
Magic Lore - Understanding: You are faced with a magical puzzle (a set of runes to decipher, a magical 
lock protecting a doorway etc) and you must solve it to progress your quest. Make a Magic Lore skill test 
with a TN of 15 - if you succeed you have beaten the puzzle, if you fail it reacts to you by firing a bolt of 
magic at you, causing 1d6 points of damage! You may make three a8empts, all within the same day, 
before the puzzle is sealed forever. You may also a8empt to solve the puzzle by chance - test your LUCK 
to succeed, but you only get one chance. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 1.
5-6 
Magic Lore - Recognising: You have been asked to collect samples of an unusual magical item carried by 
your foes. For each evil humanoid monster you defeat, make a Magic Lore skill test. You must succeed 
3+1d3 times in order to complete this task. You can carry this out whilst completing other tasks. 
Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 1.
Religion 
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. Those heroes that worship a specific 
god may need to adjust these tasks accordingly - a 
priest is unlikely to go around pretending to worship 
a different faith!
Table 10.2.8 Randomised Religion Tasks
1d6 
Description
1-2 
Religion Lore - Making Friends: You must find a temple and convince them that you are an ally or 
potential convert. Firstly, find a temple on your se8lement map (it cannot be one dedicated to the god 
you worship). Go there and make three Religion Lore rolls - you must succeed with two of the three to 
persuade the priests of your sincerity. If you fail, you may return the next day and try again, but must 
also roll 1d6 - on a roll of one a priest is enraged by your deceit and has you driven out of the temple (you 
lose one point of LUCK). Locations: City.  Mission Points: 1.
3-4 
Religion Lore - Spo8ing Enemies: Cultists have infiltrated a se8lement and you must flush them out. 
Take a tour of different locations and whenever you have an encounter with a friendly NPC make a 
Religion Lore test. If you succeed with the test roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 or 2 you have unmasked a cultist 
that you must fight. Cultist SKILL 7 STAMINA 7 Weapon: Sword Armour: None. You have at most one 
week to unmask 5 cultists to succeed.  Locations: City.  Mission Points: 2.
5-6 
Religion Lore - Puzzle: You are faced with a puzzle or challenge which is based on religious knowledge. 
Make a Religion Lore skill test with a target number of 15 - if you succeed you have beaten the puzzle, if 
you fail it reacts to your interference by smiting you, causing 1d6 points of STAMINA damage! You may 
make three a8empts, all must be within the same day, before the puzzle is sealed to you forever. 
Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 1.


--- PAGE 381 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
380
Movement Tasks
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. Movement tasks can happen at any 
point and can be combined with other tasks,.
Table 10.2.9 Randomised Movement Tasks
1d6 
1d6 
Task Description
1-2 
1-2 
Acrobatics: Bodily Control: You face an obstacle such as a narrow bridge or a hedge that can be 
circumvented by balance and bodily control (or magical means). Make 1d6 successful Acrobatics 
tests to pass it, if you fail you catch yourself and suffer 1d3 points of damage. You can retreat at 
any time, though this fails the task. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1.
3-4 
Climb: Cliff/Wall: Your way is blocked by a cliff or wall that can only be passed by climbing (or 
magical means). Make 1d3 successful Climb tests to get up, if you fail you slide off and suffer 1d6 
points of damage. Rope = +1 to your test. Grappling Hook = +2 to your test. You can retreat at any 
time, though this fails the task. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1.
5-6 
Dodge: Rain of Missiles: You must pass through a rain of hazards (pelted from the rooftops, a 
crumbling chamber, falling branches) and survive. Make 1d6 Dodge tests, suffering 1d3 points of 
damage for each fail. You can retreat at any time, though this means you fail the task. If you 
survive you succeed. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 2.
3-4 
1-2 
Jump: You are faced with a series of obstacles which you must cross by leaping from one to the 
next (rooftops, stones across a lava field, safe sections of a collapsing mineshaft). Make 1d6 Jump 
tests, suffering 1d3 points of damage for each fail. You can retreat at any time, though this means 
the task is failed. If you clear the obstacles, you succeed. As you leap clear of the last obstacle, you 
are faced with a monster to fight. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 2.
 
3-4 
Ride - Chase: You must chase down your quarry whilst mounted. You must take ten Ride tests 
and succeed in seven or more. If you catch them roll 1d6 - you must either fight (1-3) or negotiate 
(4-6). If you fight, create a suitable monster, if you negotiate, use a diplomacy task with either 
Etique8e, Bribery or Con. If you fail they escape. Locations: City, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1. 
5-6 
Ride - Gauntlet: You need to stay on your steed whilst being a8acked. Make 1d6+3 Ride skill 
tests, each time you fail take 1d3 points of STAMINA damage as you are caught by a blow. You 
can retreat at any time, though this means the task is failed. If you survive the gauntlet, you have 
succeeded but must immediately fight a monster. Locations: City, Wilderness. Mission Points: 2. 
5-6 
1-2 
Ride - Display: You need to pull off a display of horsemanship to impress or inspire onlookers, 
perhaps as part of a show or ceremony. Make 1d6+3 Ride skill tests - you must succeed in half or 
more of them. The task takes 1-2 hours.  Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.
 
3-4 
Swim - Chase / Speed: You are required to swim at pace either to pursue your quarry or escape 
danger (roll 1d6. On a 1-3 you are chasing a monster and must fight it if you win. On a 4-6 you 
are escaping a monster and must fight it if you lose). You must take ten Swim tests and succeed 
in seven or more to win. Remember to include penalties for encumbrance/armour. Locations: 
City, Dungeon, Wilderness (A body of water such as a river or lake is needed). Mission Points: 2.
5-6 
Swim - Survive/Cross: You need to keep your head above water to avoid drowning or cross a 
body of water. Make 1d6+3 Swim skill tests, each time you fail take 1 point  of STAMINA damage 
from drowning. Remember to include penalties for encumbrance and armour. Locations: City, 
Dungeon, Wilderness (Obviously, a body of water such as a river or lake is needed). Mission 
Points: 1.


--- PAGE 382 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
381
Knowledge Tasks
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. Knowledge tasks can happen at any 
point and can be combined with other tasks.
Table 10.2.10 Randomised Knowledge Tasks
1d6 
1d6 
Task Description
1-2 
1-2 
Animal Lore - Identifying: You need to identify animals from their tracks, spore and behaviours.  
Make 1d6+3 Animal Lore skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. Each skill test must 
be in a different location in a city or different room in a dungeon. In the wilderness, each one takes 
half a day of looking to accomplish your task. If you fail you have blundered into the lair of an 
animal and must fight a monster. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2.
3-4 
Locks - Making/Studying: You have acquired devices or parts of devices to study or assemble. 
Make 1d6+3 Locks skill tests and for each success pick a number between one and six. At the end 
roll 1d6 - if the result is one of the numbers you chose, you have understood the device or 
assembled the locks needed. Studying parts takes one hour for each skill test. Locations: City, 
Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 1.
5-6 
Traps - Making/Studying: You have acquired devices or parts of devices to study or assemble. 
Make 1d6+3 Trap Knowledge skill tests and for each success pick a number between one and six. 
At the end roll 1d6 - if the result is one of the numbers you chose, you have understood the device 
or made suitable traps. Studying parts takes one hour for each skill test. Locations:City, 
Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 1.
3-4 
1-2 
Crafting - Be a maker: You need to use your abilities to help make something, either helping in 
the process (e.g chopping up vegetables for a great feast, pumping the bellows for a skilled 
blacksmith) or acquiring the parts or ingredients needed by another crafter. Make 1d6+3 Crafting 
skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. Each one you fail costs you 1d6gp in 
materials. Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.
 
3-4 
Healing - Diagnosis: A strange disease is running through the population like wildfire, leaving 
ro8ing, bloated corpses in its wake. You have been asked to investigate and try and diagnose the 
cause. You must take 1d6+3 Healing skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. In a city 
each one must be made in a different location, in the wilderness you may stay in one area but 
finding victims takes half a day each time. If you fail, you have caught something yourself - roll 
on Table 4.3.2 Diseases. Locations: Wilderness, City. Mission Points: 1.
 
5-6 
Healing - Curing: Your skills as a medic are being put to the test with a great disaster (natural or 
created by invaders) leaving so many injured that the temples are overrun. You have been asked 
to assist. You must take 1d6+3 Healing skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. In a 
city each one must be made in a different location, in the wilderness you may stay in one area but 
finding victims takes half a day each time. Every failed Healing skill test costs you 1d6gp in lost 
medical supplies. Locations: Wilderness, City. Mission Points: 1.
5-6 
1-2 
Languages - Translation: You need to translate some information wri8en in an unusual 
language. You must take 1d6+3 Languages skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. 
If you fail, you can either accept the failure (and roll for setbacks) or, if you are in a se8lement 
with a ‘College’ location, you can pay a scholar 5gp per ‘success’ to complete the work for you. 
The translation task takes one day of uninterrupted work. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. 
Mission Points: 1.


--- PAGE 383 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
382
Diplomacy   
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. Diplomacy tasks can happen at any 
point and can be combined with other tasks provided 
they don’t stop you from using social skills. Most 
diplomacy tasks require you to be in a se8lement 
(they could also be adapted to the wilderness if you 
are willing to find places where people live).
Table 10.2.11 Randomised Diplomacy Tasks
1d6 
Task Description
1 
Acrobatics: Display: Your acrobatic skills are put to the test in a display of movements designed to 
impress a crowd of onlookers, perhaps as part of a show or ceremony. You must make six successful skill 
tests out of a maximum of ten a8empts to pass the task. A8empting the display takes at least half a day. 
Locations: City.  Mission Points: 1.
2 
Con - Intimidation: Whether you like it or not, the best way to proceed is to bully and scare people into 
doing what you want them to do. Make 1d6+3 Con tests, you must succeed in half or more. Each must 
be made whilst in a different location within a se8lement. If you fail the task, you end up being 
confronted by 1d2 enraged victims - create a foe and fight them.  Locations: City. Mission Points: 2.
3 
Etique=e - Convince: You need to convince or persuade people to believe you or do as you say. Make 
1d6+3 Etique8e tests, you must succeed in half or more. Each must be made in a different location within 
a se8lement. The task takes at least half a day. If you fail you may try again the next day, when you have 
thought of be8er arguments, but if you fail twice the task is failed. Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.
4 
Etique=e - Extract Information: You have been sent to track down a source of information. You need to 
visit specific locations and find an NPC to talk to (encounter or a trader). Roll 1d6 then move to: 1-
Temple, 2-Marketplace, 3-Keep, 4-Theatre, 5-Streets, 6-Tavern.  Once there, you must succeed with an 
Etique8e, Con, Bargain or Leadership roll (your choice) to find out where you need to go - you must do 
this 1d6+3 times and succeed in half or more. You must complete this task within a day. If you fail, you 
have ended up in the wrong part of a town and you are a8acked. Locations: City. Mission Points: 2.
5 
Leadership - Inspiration: You find yourself making a speech to a crowd to get them on your side. Make 
5 Leadership tests. For each success, roll 1d6 and total them - On a 13 or more you have won the crowd 
over. On a 6-12 the crowd is uncertain and you may make another a8empt. On a 5 or less, the mob turns 
on you and you are pelted with debris, taking 1d6 points of damage. Locations: City.  Mission Points: 1.
6 
Leadership - Rallying: Recent terrible events have left people fearful and anxious, you must rally their 
spirits. Make 1d6+3 Leadership tests, you must succeed in half or more. Each must be done in a separate 
friendly encounter (social encounter or a friendly NPC). All skill tests must be made on the same day - if 
you fail you may try again the next day, but that is your final chance. Locations: City.  Mission Points: 1.
3-4 
Law - Arguing: You have become embroiled in a legal dispute, which may not be very heroic but 
resolving it is the easiest way to advance your aims. Take 1d6+3 Law tests, you must succeed in 
half or more to complete the task. If you fail you have got yourself into legal trouble and must roll 
on the Lawbreaker table with a minimum result of a seven. Locations: City.  Mission Points: 1.
 
5-6 
Evaluate: Your enemies are carrying some type of item that is of interest to you - you need to 
accurately assess their quality, value and origin after acquiring them. Items are acquired by 
killing enemies - each time you kill something you acquire one piece to assess. You must make 
1d6+3 Evaluate skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. If you fail, you need to 
acquire another 1d6 items to assess. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2.


--- PAGE 384 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
383
General Tasks
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. General tasks can happen at any point 
and can be combined with other tasks.
Table 10.2.12 Randomised General Tasks
1d6 
1d6 
Task Description
1-2 
1-2 
Gather Clues: Each monster you defeat may have a clue to help you. When you defeat a foe, 
examine it to gain information. Roll 2d6 - if the total is twelve you have found what you need. 
Each time you kill a new enemy, add +1 to your roll. You can complete this whilst carrying out 
other tasks. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 2.
 
3-4 
Be Lucky: Only dumb luck will allow you to succeed at this point  - make a LUCK test, you must 
pass it or suffer a setback. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1.
 
5-6 
Foretelling: You are faced with a situation where you have to choose quickly with li8le 
Information.  Pick ‘odds’ or ‘evens’ and roll 1d6. If you were right, you have succeeded, but if you 
are wrong you fail and suffer a setback. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1.
3-4 
1-2 
Put out a Fire: You need to quench a fire by making a fire break or throwing water. The fire has 
20 points of STAMINA and you can do 1d3 points of damage to it each round by succeeding with 
a test of Strength or Thrown skills. You have 15 rounds to put it out. Magical means may also be 
used, if you have them. If you succeed in pu8ing it out you are a8acked by 1d3 Fire Sprites - Fire 
Sprite SKILL 5 STAMINA 4 Weapon: Touch, does 3 points of STAMINA damage (fire) if it hits. If 
you fail, you must roll for a setback . Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 2. 
 
3-4 
Awareness - Spo=ing: You are looking for a specific type of object or person. Each time you come 
into a new location (se8lement), area (wilderness) or section (dungeon) you can make a roll. You 
must succeed 1d6+3 times. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1.
5-6 
Awareness - Noticing: You have been asked to go and look for unusual or troubling activity, 
either in a specific location or of a specific type. Make 1d6+3 Awareness skill tests, you must 
succeed in half or more of them. Each skill test requires half a day of surveillance. Each time you 
fail, you have accidentally interrupted something and should roll an encounter using the 
encounter tables provided in this book. Locations: City, Wilderness. Mission Points: 2.
5-6 
1-2 
Bash down an obstacle: Your way is blocked by an obstruction, you must quickly bash it down. 
It has 20 points of STAMINA and you can damage it with melee weapons (you hit automatically 
but it has ‘Monster Heavy’ armour) or use your Strength skill to pull it apart - 1d3 damage with 
each success. You have 15 rounds to destroy it. A pick or shovel adds +2 to your tests. Magical 
means may be used. If you fail the task you suffer a setback. If you succeed, a monster will leap 
through the gap to fight you. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. Mission Points: 1. 
 
3-4 
Bargain - Sell or Buy: You need to buy or sell items for a reasonable price. Make 1d6+3 Bargain 
tests, you must succeed in half or more. Each test must be made with a different ‘vendor’ (shop, 
merchant etc). If you succeed, gain the information you need and 2d6gp. If you fail, you fail the 
task and lose 2d6gp. It takes at least a whole day.  Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.
 
5-6 
City Lore - Navigate: You need to find the safest route through a city (perhaps to avoid trouble, 
perhaps to guide someone). Make 1d6+3 City Lore skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of 
them. Each one must be made whilst in a different location within a se8lement. If you fail this task 
you may restart it, provided it is still the same day. Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.


--- PAGE 385 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
384
Subterfuge Tasks 
Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. Subterfuge tasks can be combined with 
other tasks, particularly combat and movement tasks, 
or they can be a8empted separately. Remember to 
consider penalties for encumbrance and armour 
when making your skill tests.
Table 10.2.13 Randomised Subterfuge Tasks
1d6 
1d6 
Description
1-3 
1 
Climb: Silent Climb: To move forward, you need to stealthily climb a barrier, such as the wall of 
a house or camp, or a barricade blocking a corridor. Make 5 tests of your Climb skill and then a 
test of your Sneaking skill - for each success with your Climb skill you gain a +1 bonus to your 
Sneaking skill test and for each failure you suffer a -1 penalty. If you succeed you have avoided 
confrontation, if you fail you must fight 1d3 monsters. Locations: City, Dungeon, Wilderness. 
Mission Points: 2.
 
2 
Disguise - Misdirection: You need to conceal your identity to trick your opponent.  Make 1d6+3 
Disguise skill tests you must succeed in half or more of them (a disguise kit adds +1 to the test, 
certain spells might add more). Each skill test is taken when you have a ‘friendly’ (non-combat) 
encounter. Each time you fail, roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 you are spo8ed and a8acked - create an 
appropriate monster. You have 1d3 days to complete this task. Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.
 
3 
Disguise - Deception: You need to convince people that you are some other, specific, type of 
person (i.e. that you are a city guard, or member of the merchants guild) so that you can pass on 
some misinformation. You must first observe your target and then copy them. Make 1d6+3 tests 
of your Awareness skill and the same number of Disguise skill tests (a disguise kit adds +1 to the 
test, certain spells might add more). You must succeed in half or more of them. Each pair of skill 
tests requires 1d3 hours of surveillance of your target and each one must be carried out in a 
separate location in the se8lement. If you fail the task, the Watch has been alerted to your 
activities and you must roll on the Lawbreaker table. Locations: City. Mission Points: 2.
 
4 
Locks - Breaking: To make progress you need to defeat a number of locks. In a city they will be 
on buildings, in a dungeon they will be on the room doors. In a se8lement you must make the 
a8empts in different locations. In a dungeon, assume any door you come across is locked. Make 
1d6+3 tests of your Locks skill to proceed - each time you fail you a8ract a ’guard’ that a8acks 
you. Guard SKILL 6 STAMINA 7 Weapon: Mace Armour: Leather Cuirass & Small Shield. 
Locations: City, Dungeon. Mission Points: 3.
 
5 
Sleight of Hand, Theft: Visit 1d6+3 shops or traders and make Sleight of Hand skill checks as you 
try to acquire objects needed for your quest, if you fail more than you succeed you are caught and 
must roll on the Lawbreaker table. Each shop or trader must be in a different location. Locations: 
City. Mission Points: 1.
 
6 
Sneaking - Stakeout: You must stay at or near a specific place (location in a se8lement, area in a 
wilderness, section in a dungeon) for 1d3 days (2d6 hours in a dungeon) and make a Sneaking 
skill test, remembering to roll for encounters as you wait. If you stay in place and pass the test, 
you succeed. If you fail, you are spo8ed and a8acked by a monster. Locations: City, Wilderness, 
Dungeon. Mission Points: 1.


--- PAGE 386 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
385
1d6 
1d6 
Description
4-6 
1 
Sneaking - Stealth: You need to move whilst avoiding detection by your enemies either to throw 
them off your tail or just to avoid confrontation. Make 1d6+3 Sneaking skill tests, you must 
succeed in half or more of them. Each skill test must be in a different location in a city or different 
room in a dungeon. In the wilderness, each one takes half a day of ‘sneaking’ to accomplish your 
task. Succeed in the task and you can avoid encounters as you glide silently past, but failure 
means you must roll on the appropriate encounter table as you blunder into someone or 
something. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2.
 
2 
Traps - Finding/Disabling: You have been tasked to find and disable 1d3+3 traps, sca8ered 
around the se8lement, wilderness or dungeon. In a se8lement there is a maximum of one trap per 
location and finding it requires a successful Trap Knowledge skill test (if failed, move to another 
location and try again). In a wilderness there are a number of traps set about one area, you may 
test your Trap Knowledge skill each half day spent searching to discover one (or two with a 
critical success). In a dungeon there are (at least) 1d3 per section, assign them to random rooms. 
If you fail your Trap Knowledge skill test, roll on Table 4.4.2 ‘Traps’ to find out what happens! 
Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2.
 
3 
City Lore - Contacts: You need to find some unusual or possibly illegal services. Make 1d6+3 City 
Lore skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. Each one must be made whilst in a 
different location within a se8lement. If you fail the task you have upset the local militia, roll on 
the Lawbreaker table. Locations: City. Mission Points: 1.
 
4 
Con - Deceit: Sometimes there is nothing wrong with telling a few li8le lies. You must a8empt 
them whilst having social encounters. Make 1d6+3 Con skill tests, you must succeed in half or 
more of them. Each one must be made during a different encounter. If you fail the task your social 
skill rolls have a -2 penalty in this se8lement for 1d3 days as mistrust festers. Locations: City. 
Mission Points: 1.
 
5 
Secret Signs - Identifying: Someone is using secret signs or a code to carry out their evil plans. 
You need to find and decode these markers so you can understand what they are doing. Make 
1d6+3 Secret Signs skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. In a city each sign or code 
will be in a different location (scratched on the side of a building). In the wilderness they will be 
carved into trees or rocks (searching for one takes half a day) and in a dungeon they will be 
carved or painted onto walls (1d3 per dungeon section). Also, fragments of the code will be 
carried by any evil humanoids that you defeat. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon.  Mission 
Points: 2.
 
6 
Secret Signs - Using: You need to communicate with an ally using a secret code. Make 1d6+3 
Secret Signs skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. Each test needs to be done in a 
separate location or, in the wilderness, at most one every half a day as you move around an area 
leaving a trail for them to follow. Should you fail the task in a city, you are suspected of being a 
criminal and must roll on the Lawbreaker table. In the wilderness, failure simply means you do 
not pass on your message. Locations: City, Wilderness.  Mission Points: 2.


--- PAGE 387 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
386
Exploration
 Choose one of the tasks from this list, or roll to find a 
random task. Remember to consider your location, as 
not every task can be carried out in every 
environment. Exploration tasks can be quite time 
consuming, remember to bring enough food and 
equipment to survive in the wilds. Such tasks might 
also be combined with others that you complete 
‘along the way’.
Table 10.2.14 Randomised Exploration Tasks
1d6 
1d6 
Task Description
1-2 
1-2 
Fishing: You have been asked to gather some information on the quality of fishing available in 
part of the wilderness. Use the rules provided in the Wilderness Creation & Adventures chapter 
to find a random area of the wilderness and make your way there. Make 1d6+3 Fishing skill tests, 
you must succeed in half or more of them. Each skill test requires half a day of fishing for you to 
make an assessment. Each success grants you 1d6 meals worth of food. Each time you fail, you 
are a8acked by 1d3 enraged Marsh Hoppers. Marsh Hopper SKILL 4 STAMINA 4 Weapon: Small 
Bite Armour: None. Locations: Wilderness. Mission Points: 2.
 
3-4 
Region Lore - Investigation: You have been asked to investigate some part of the wilderness, 
perhaps to help create a map or make a report. Use the rules provided in the Wilderness Creation 
& Adventures chapter to find a random area of the wilderness and make your way there. Then, 
camp there for 1d6+3 days taking a Region Lore test each day, before you return to whence you 
came. Each time you fail, you are spo8ed and must fight a monster. If you succeed in half or more 
of the Region Lore tests, you have succeeded in the task, but you only get to find out when you 
return bearing your map or report. Locations: Wilderness. Mission Points: 2.
 
5-6 
Dungeon Delving: You have been tasked with finding and investigating a nearby dungeon and 
have been given a rough location. Use the rules provided in the Wilderness Creation & 
Adventures chapter to find a random area of the wilderness and make your way there - this area 
will include a dungeon entrance. You must investigate at least 2 sections of the dungeon before 
you can return whence you came. Locations: Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 3.
3-4 
1-2 
Hunting: You need to put your skills to test in hunting down a quarry, whether it be a beast or 
humanoid. You must make 1d6+3 tests of your Hunting skill, all tests must be made in one day - 
in a se8lement they should be made in different locations and in the wilderness each test takes 
half an hour of searching. If you succeed in half or more of the tests, you have found your quarry 
- create a monster and fight it! If you fail, it has escaped and you may try again the next day - if 
you fail for a second time the task has failed. Locations: Wilderness, City. Mission Points: 2.
 
3-4 
Sea Lore - Mapping: You have been asked to create or improve a map. This must be done at a 
wilderness area that is ‘Shoreline & Sea’. You must make 1d6+3 Sea Lore skill tests, you must 
succeed in half or more of them. Each successful skill test means you have mapped the shoreline 
for one area (so you must take them as you enter a new area), so only start this if you have a 
significant number of ‘Shoreline & Sea’ areas to map! If you fail, you may go back to the areas 
where you failed your skill test and try again. Each a8empt takes one day of mapping. Locations: 
Wilderness.  Mission Points: 2.


--- PAGE 388 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
387
1d6 
1d6 
Description
 
5-6 
Sea Lore - Crew: You have joined the crew of a ship and need to lend a hand; Make 1d6+3 Sea 
Lore skill tests, you must succeed in half or more of them. Each skill test counts as one day at sea. 
If you succeed you have reached your destination unharmed. If you fail the task, your ship has 
gone off course (due to your mistakes) and you must repeat the test. If you fail a second time your 
ship is sunk! You take 2d6 damage from drowning before you are washed ashore at a random 
wilderness area (obviously one with a shoreline). Locations: Wilderness.  Mission Points: 3.
5-6 
1-2 
Underground Lore - Investigate & Map: You have been asked to go into a dungeon and map it 
out, making note of the layout, geology, origin and so on. You are provided with some quills, 
parchment and ink. After you have found your dungeon, you may begin the process of recording 
the details.  You must succeed with 1d3+3 Underground Lore skill tests, you may take one test in 
each dungeon section. After you have collected the required information, leave and return to 
your starting point to complete the task. Locations: Dungeon.  Mission Points: 3.
 
3-4 
World Lore - Travel & Navigate: You have been asked to go out in the wilderness and explore a  
specific type of environment e.g. ‘Seek out the hills’. You should pick a type of environment at 
random from the list provided in the wilderness chapter of this book, or pick an area at random 
- see the rules provided in the chapter on Wilderness Creation & Adventures. Make a World Lore 
skill test to see if you know which direction to travel. If you succeed, move to the closest area of 
that type on your map (or the randomly 
chosen wilderness area). If you fail, 
travel through three wilderness areas in 
a random direction before you realise 
your mistake and can retake the World 
Lore skill test. Repeat until you end up 
in the right type of environment!   Once 
at the right wilderness area, you must 
spend 1d3 days ‘surveying’ it before 
returning to your starting location to 
provide 
your 
report. 
Locations: 
Wilderness. Mission Points: 3.
 
5-6 
Animal Lore - Handling: You need to 
find and then look after or manage a 
wild animal. Go out into the wilds until 
you encounter a wild animal and then 
make 1d6+3 Animal Lore skill tests, for 
each failed test you take 1d3 points of 
damage as the beast tears at you. All 
skill tests must be completed within one 
day. If you succeed with half or more of 
the test, the beast is now under your 
control. If you fail, you must fight it. 
Locations: 
Dungeon, 
Wilderness. 
Mission Points: 2.


--- PAGE 389 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
388
Monsters -  what are we fighting?
In many of the tasks described in this section we refer 
to fighting a monster or foe as one of the problems the 
heroes have to face. 
Usually when creating or running a quest, the 
Director will know what specific monsters or foes lie 
in wait for the heroes to fight but if you don’t have a 
specific idea or want to be surprised there are a 
couple of ways to generate monsters at random.
The first method is to use the dungeon encounter 
tables described in Chapter 5. An important thing to 
ask oneself is - which table should I use? As a guide 
we recommend the following, based on the strength 
of your hero. This should provide a challenge for a 
solo hero; if you are making your adventures for a 
group of heroes you should increase the difficulty by 
one or more steps (so a group of three ‘civilians’ 
would be treated as a ‘novice’, a group of three 
‘veterans’ would be treated as an ‘expert’ or ‘master’ 
depending on how capable you feel the group is). If 
you are not sure, try using a lower level of difficulty 
and increase it as you go.
Table 5.5 Encounter Difficulty by Hero Grade
Hero Grade  
Improvement  Maximum SKILL / 
Which Dungeon Level is recommended for a solo player or 
Points  
MAGIC 
 
small group*
Civilian  
2 
 
4 / 2 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 1 but with -2 SKILL, -2 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters.
Novice  
5 
 
5 / 5 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 1
Competent 
7 
 
6 / 6 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 1 but with +1 SKILL, +2 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters or Dungeon Level 2
Veteran 
8 
 
7 / 7 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 2 or 3
Expert  
9 
 
8 / 8 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 3 but with +1 SKILL, +3 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters or Dungeon Level 4
Master  
10 
 
9 / 9 
 
 
Use Dungeon Level 4
Champion  
11 
 
10 / 10  
 
Use Dungeon Level 4 but with +1 SKILL, +4 STAMINA 
applied to the monsters, or Dungeon Level 5
*Difficulty is very hard to judge. If you are finding the encounters too easy, increase the Dungeon Level you are rolling on. 
If you are finding them too hard, reduce the Dungeon Level. Note that the monsters in Dungeon Level 5 are generally very 
deadly.
The second method is to create a monster from 
scratch using the rules provided in Chapter 6, with 
the rules for the ‘Monster!’ random encounter.  The 
table below will allow you to generate an opponent, 
which might be easy to fight or extremely difficult. 


--- PAGE 390 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
389
Table 6.3.2 Random Monster Generator. Roll Separately for each trait to build up a monster.
  
* Weak Monster - subtract 2 from the 2d6 rolls for A3acks, SKILL, STAMINA, Weapon & Armour
  
* Strong Monster - add 2 to the 2d6 rolls for A3acks, SKILL, STAMINA, Weapon & Armour
Type - 2d6 
 
2-5:  
 
Humanoid
6-8:  
 
Beast
9-10:   
Undead
11:  
 
Demon
12:  
 
Other (elemental, construct etc).
Move - 1d6 
 
1-4:  
 
Walks or runs
5:  
 
Flying
6:  
 
Burrowing/Swimming
Intelligence - 1d6 
1-3:  
 
Low
4-5:  
 
Moderate
6:  
 
High
A8acks - 2d6  
2-8:  
 
1 A8ack
9-10:   
2 A8acks
11-12:   
3 A8acks
SKILL* - 2d6  
2-4:  
 
-3 SKILL
5-8:  
 
-2 SKILL
9-10:   
-1 SKILL
11:  
 
Same SKILL
12:  
 
SKILL+1
STAMINA* -  2d6 
2-4:  
 
-5 STAMINA
5-8:  
 
-3 STAMINA
9-10:   
-1 STAMINA
11:  
 
Same STAMINA, 
12:  
 
STAMINA+2
Weapon - 2d6  
2-7:  
 
Small Bite/Claw
8-10:   
Large Bite/Claw
11-12:   
Very Large Bite/Claw
Armour - 2d6  
2-7:  
 
Monster Light Armour
8-10:   
Monster Medium Armour, 
11-12:   
Monster Heavy Armour
*Use the SKILL and STAMINA of the hero as the base number. For magic using heroes, use their MAGIC score instead of 
SKILL. So a hero with SKILL of 7 who rolls a 9 on 2d6 faces a creature with SKILL 6 (i.e. their SKILL minus one).


--- PAGE 391 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
390
The third method we suggest is to browse the 
bestiaries and encounter tables until you find 
something that feels appropriate. Remember, don’t 
make it too easy! If you can, look for creatures and 
monsters that fit in with the theme of your quest - if 
your opponent is evil orc captain, try and fight lots of 
orcs, goblins and hobgoblins along the way. If you are 
fighting a necromancer hiding in an ancient tomb, 
some form of undead would probably be a good 
choice.
Combat Complications
In addition to finding a monster to fight, you can add 
an extra element to the fight by adding a combat 
complication. If you can, try to think of something 
that is appropriate to your quest and to the evil force 
that is behind it. This can be as severe or mild as you 
wish, everything from ‘the weapons of the cultists 
burst into magical flames in combat’ to ‘the beasts of 
the ogre-king have a foul, off-pu8ing smell to them’. 
This sort of additional detail helps distinguish one 
mission or group of missions from another. You can 
keep the same combat complication throughout or 
vary it. The table below gives you some random ideas 
to get you started.
Table 10.2.15 Combat Complications
d6 
Complication
1 
Poison: Your opponent has a poisoned blade (or fangs). Each time they hit, they do 1 extra point of 
STAMINA damage to you.
2 
Ally: The creature you face has brought a friend to fight alongside it - they have an ally of the same type, 
but with 2 less SKILL and 3 less STAMINA. You must fight both at the same time.
3 
Trapped: Your foe has placed a cunning trap nearby and will try to lure you into it. Make a test of your 
Trap Knowledge skill - if you pass, you spot the trap and avoid it. If you fail, you take 1d3 points of 
STAMINA damage at the start of the fight as you blunder into the trap and must fight with a -1 SKILL 
penalty due to the wound (this disappears after one night's rest).
4 
Diseased: The creature you fight is dripping diseased pus or has a hacking cough. If they hit you, test 
against your STAMINA by rolling 3d6 and comparing it to your maximum STAMINA. If you fail, roll on 
Table 4.3.2 Diseases to see what you have caught.
5 
Bleeding Out: Your foe staggers into this fight carrying a wound - they lose 1 point of STAMINA each 
round but a8ack with desperation, adding +1 to their damage roll if they hit.
6 
Asleep: At the start of the fight, the monster is sleeping lightly. If you can pass a Sneaking skill test you 
can ambush them and gain +6 to your combat roll and +2 to your damage roll in the first round. If you 
fail the Sneaking skill test you fight as normal.


--- PAGE 392 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
391
Finding a random location / area / room
Many of the missions require you to find a random 
place or your map - a random location in the city, 
random area in the wilderness or random room in a 
dungeon. There are a number of methods for doing 
this. The usual method is to drop or roll a dice onto 
your map and see where it ends up - if it goes off the 
map, roll it again. The place you want is the one 
under the dice, if it se8les on a boundary line then use 
your judgement to decide where you are going.
The second method applies to cities only -  use the 
‘Random Location’ numbers on the locations table 
4.1.5 ‘List of Se8lement Locations’ - roll a 1d6 twice 
and refer to the numbers in that column - a roll of 3 
followed by a 2 would be the Hospital. A roll of 5 
followed by a 4 would need to be rerolled as there is 
no 5.4 on the list. For locations with more than one 
appearance (Inns for example) either roll again or use 
your judgement to decide which one is most 
appropriate.
Finding a random area in the wilderness can be done 
by dropping or rolling a dice onto your map, or by 
starting from a point on your map and using the 
compass points and a random distance.
Table 6.1.2 - Random Wilderness Area finder
The area you are looking for lies 3+1d6 areas away in the following direction..roll 1d6 three times.
 
 
 
 
Roll 1d6 (Reroll 5 or 6) to find a column then..
Roll 1d6 (Reroll 5 or 6)  
1-2 
 
 
3-4
to find a direction.
 
1 
 
 
North  
 
North East
 
2 
 
 
East 
 
 
South East
 
3 
 
 
South  
 
South West
 
4 
 
 
West 
 
 
North West
For example: If you roll a 2, followed by a 4 then a 3, the random wilderness area lies 5 areas away (50 miles) in the South 
West direction. A roll of 4, 2 and 2 would mean it lies 7 areas away (70 miles) to the East. 
In a dungeon a random room can be found by 
dropping a dice onto your map and choosing the 
room that is nearest to the where the 
dice lands. You can of course choose 
the most appropriate room for the 
encounter - if it happens to be the 
lair of a significant enemy, pick a 
room that is near to the end of the 
dungeon section.
Adding Extra Elements to your 
Mission - Setbacks, Complications 
and Timers
Once you have the basic ‘skeleton’ of 
your mission you might want to add 
some extra facets to give it more 
depth and challenge. These can make your task much 
harder but in return they help to bring in elements of 
unpredictability 
and 
novelty, 
making sure that your heroes have 
to stay on their toes.
Setbacks
When your hero fails a task, they can 
try again by choosing another 
similar task (as noted above) or they 
can suffer a setback - this might 
simply be a different task, or it 
might cause a different, unexpected 
problem they have to deal with. 


--- PAGE 393 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
392
This table provides a number of 
suggestions. As usual, you should 
feel free to think of other more 
appropriate problems. 
For example, if you fail at the task of 
finding information you need in the 
library of one city, perhaps you have 
to travel to another city to continue 
your research. Whatever happens, 
failing a task should result in some 
kind of penalty.
Table 10.2.16 Setbacks
1d6 
Suggested Setback
1 
In order to make up for your 
failure, you should complete 
two other tasks (one of which 
must be from the same 
category as the failed task)
2 
Your failure has alerted a 
nearby 
monster 
to 
your 
presence, and it leaps to 
a8ack. You must fight it 
immediately.
3 
Ruined Reputation - 
somehow 
news 
of 
your 
failure gets out, or you 
simply 
suffer 
a 
loss 
of 
confidence - you have -1 to 
your social skill tests (Con, Etique8e, Leadership, Bargain) until you complete a mission.
4 
Somehow your failure has marked you as some kind of criminal - the next time you are in a city, you 
must roll on the Lawbreaker table (but with a minimum result of a 6).
5 
You’ve managed to take a knock, a niggling injury. You have -1 to any ‘physical’ skills, including combat, 
until you can completely rest for 1d3 days.
6 
Roll 1d6: Your Opponent either dies (1-3) or takes up a new evil plan, and you should roll again on Table  
10.2.1 ‘What is Happening - the Quest Hook’ to see what they are up to. Either way, your current quest 
has come to a sudden and unexpected end!


--- PAGE 394 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
393
Mission Complications
Every mission can come with its own individual 
quirks, good or bad. These complications usually 
reflect some external factors that are not specifically 
related to the mission you are undertaking and help 
add colour and depth to your adventures - after all, 
the world does not stop just because you are 
undertaking a quest. As with the other parts of this 
section, it is up to you to decide if you want to add a 
mission complication or not, and if you want to create 
one, choose one from this list or roll randomly.
Table 10.2.17  Mission Complications
1d6 
1d6 
Description
1-2 
1 
The gods look kindly on your efforts. Restore one point of temporary LUCK (or if it is already at 
maximum, your next LUCK roll does not cost you a point of LUCK).
 
2 
The gods are angered by your meddling, lose one point of temporary LUCK.
 
3 
Saboteur. If you succeed in a task roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 the task should be considered a failure 
and your hero suffers a setback. You may rid yourself of this saboteur by testing your LUCK.
 
4 
Storm season - terrible weather lashes the lands you are travelling in. If you are in the wilderness 
add +2 to your rolls when determining the state of the weather. The storms last for 2d6 weeks.
 
5 
Ward - a child (SKILL 3 STAMINA 4) has a8ached itself to you - you must either find somewhere 
safe for them protect them for mission, when they are reunited with their guardian.
 
6 
Challenging - the tasks in this mission are tougher than usual and all tests  have a -1 penalty.
3-4 
1 
Slandered - someone has spread some nasty rumours about you, your social skill tests (Etique8e, 
Con, Bargain, Leadership) are at -1 until you can restore your reputation completing a mission.
 
2 
Ambush - Monsters have been dispatched to assassinate you. When completing any task roll 1d6 
- on a 1 you are a8acked by a monster; you must test Awareness or the monster a8acks with 
surprise (+6 to combat roll, +2 to damage roll) in the first round. There are 3 a8empts on your life.
 
3 
Big Job - If a task requires you to pass a certain number of tests, you have to pass one extra but 
you also get one extra a8empt (i.e. if the task needs you to succeed with 4/7 you now need 5/8).
 
4 
Illegal - the Watch has been fooled into treating you as a criminal. After any task is completed in 
a city, roll on the Lawbreaker table with a minimum result of seven (below seven is treated as a 
seven). You can stop this by testing your LUCK or by completing the ‘Law-Arguing’ task.
 
5 
Collection - some local merchants appreciate what you are doing and give you a purse containing 
5d6gp to help you on your way
 
6 
Tricked - your mission is not what it seems..after each task, roll 1d6. On a roll of 1 completing the 
task does not provide any progress - you should find another similar task to replace it.
5-6 
1 
Blessed by a priestess - a priestess blesses you, you gain +1 to all tests for the next 3d6 days
 
2 
Follower - A stranger, impressed by your heroism, approaches and offers to help. If you accept 
you gain a follower, SKILL 6 STAMINA 8 Weapon: Mace Armour: Leather Hauberk and Small 
Shield. They will stay with you for 2d6 days.
 
3 
Gift - A stranger approaches you and gives you a Potion of STAMINA.
 
4 
A lingering disease has spread across the land - each day the hero must roll 3d6 vs their 
maximum STAMINA - if they roll more, the sickness has taken a grip and they have -1 SKILL this 
day. The disease comes to an end as you finish this mission.
 
5 
Cursed by a hag - a cackling hag curses you, you suffer -1 to all tests for the next 3d6 days.
 
6 
Easy Peasy - the tasks in this mission are more straightforward than usual and all tests of special 
skills (not combat rolls) have a +1 bonus.


--- PAGE 395 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
394
Mission Timer or Countdown
Once your hero knows that something is up and they 
are required to deal with it, an obvious question to 
ask is: how long do they have? If you are designing 
your quests and missions you will probably have an 
idea of how long it should take to resolve the problem 
and what will happen if the hero is too slow. For 
example, you might decide that if nobody stops him, 
the evil priest will commence their ritual in 17 days, 
at the end of the end of the current lunar cycle. If the 
heroes do not prevent this, a great demon will be 
summoned into the world. Your hero may or may not 
be aware of this fact.
Having a deadline like this isn’t required but it can 
provide your heroes with an impetus to get on with 
things and not be overly cautious or slow. The idea 
should be applied with care; in most cases heroes will 
be eager to get on with their questing without having 
a timer but it can also add an element of extra peril. 
Timers should be considered an ‘optional extra’. If a 
timer is used, the Director may wish to keep it secret 
or to share it with the heroes. 
As with difficulty, providing guidelines for timing is 
hard as every person or group will have their own 
style of running the game. Some groups will want to 
rush to the end and others will prefer a slower pace. 
If you do wish to add a timer, the following are some 
suggestions for different types you can use to add 
some extra peril to your questing.
Table 10.2.18 Random Mission Timers
1d6 
Type of timer. If the timer runs out your overall mission has failed.
1 
No Timer. You can take as long as you need! (If you are creating missions for a group of heroes, you may 
not want to tell them this).
2 
Running Total: For each day in the city or a dungeon add 1d6 and for each day in the wilderness add 
one to a running total. If it reaches 15 / 30 / 60 (depending on the mission difficulty) your time has run 
out and the mission has failed.
3 
No rest: If you rest (take part in no tasks) for a day roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 your opponent has taken 
advantage of your sloth to finish their task and your mission is failed (Travelling to or from somewhere 
to carry out your mission does not count as a day of rest).
4 
Fixed Timers: Add up times for each task. City tasks take 2 days, dungeon tasks take 1 day and 
wilderness tasks take 3 days for each area crossed. If you take longer than the total, your mission fails.
5 
Failure Timer: Every time you fail a task, it gives your opponent a chance to get on with their plans. Keep 
a track of your failures. If you get more than 1 failure for an easy mission, more than 2 for a moderate 
mission or more than 4 for a hard mission, you have failed.
6 
The clock of doom: At the end of each day roll 1d6 - if it is an odd number, the ‘clock’ ticks forward one 
 
place. The clock for an easy mission is 6 ‘ticks’, a moderate mission has 12 ‘ticks’ and a hard mission has 
20 ‘ticks’.


--- PAGE 396 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
395
Remember Random Encounters, Weather, Terrain…
This book and the other Advanced Fighting Fantasy 
rulebooks provide a wealth of random encounters 
plus rules covering terrain and weather, all of which 
are meant to provide challenges for your hero.
These should still happen when you are on a quest or 
mission!
The descriptions of specific tasks given in this section 
assume that you are also checking for other problems 
- a hero that ventures into the wilderness to carry out 
a survey should have to navigate there and deal with 
monsters and problems they meet on the way as part 
of the adventure. A hero going into a dungeon to find 
parts of a magical puzzle still has to cope with the 
monsters that normally live in the dungeon and all 
the other hazards of such places.
The components of each mission are only one part of 
it; travelling around the world and dealing with its 
surprises is a big part of making it feel like a real 
adventure.
Example of a Random Mission
As frequently noted in this section, the advice is that 
you use this information as a spur to your 
imagination - read or roll on the tables, then mix it up 
to come up with something that makes sense to you. 
For people who aren’t familiar with how to build up 
quests and missions in a role playing game, an 
example might be helpful.  We decide to create a 
moderately hard mission for one of our heroes. Using 
the tables in this section and rolling randomly we 
come up with the following: 
Table 10.2.1  What is Happening - the Quest Hook: 
A powerful monster or person is on a rampage of 
violence and destruction. You should find them and 
bring them down.
Table 10.2.2 Why is it your problem? You seek fame 
or notoriety, acting the hero is a good start!
Table 10.2.3 Typical mission objectives -  Find a 
significant clue: By carrying out this mission you will 
uncover a piece of information or clue that will help 
you decide what to do next.
We Decide to make this a ‘moderate’ mission with 11-
20 mission points and including a decent (4-6) 
number of combats (bearing in mind that our hero 
may still have to fight other encounters as they travel 
around).
Using Table 10.2.5 Randomised Task Categories we 
start rolling and keep a running total of how many 
mission points each task is worth.
Task 1. Diplomacy. Con - Intimidation: Whether you 
like it or not, the best way to proceed is to bully and 
scare people into doing what you want them to do. 
Make 1d6+3 Con skill tests, you must succeed in half 
or more of them. Each one must be made whilst in a 
different location within a se8lement. If you fail the 
task, you end up being confronted by 1d2 enraged 
victims of your threats - create a foe and fight them.  
Locations: City. Mission Points: 2. (Running Total 2)
Task 2.  Knowledge. Evaluate: Your enemies are 
carrying some type of item that is of interest to you - 
you need to accurately assess their quality, value and 
origin after acquiring them. Items are acquired by 
killing enemies - each time you kill something you 
acquire one piece to assess. You must make 1d6+3 
Evaluate skill tests, you must succeed in half or more 
of them. If you fail, you need to acquire another 1d6 
items 
to 
assess. 
Locations: 
City, 
Wilderness, 
Dungeon. Mission Points: 2. (Running Total 4)
Task 3. Exploration. Underground Lore - Investigate 
& Map: You have been asked to go into a dungeon 
and map it out, making note of the layout, geology, 
origin and so on. You are provided with some quills, 


--- PAGE 397 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
396
parchment and ink. After you have found your 
dungeon, you may begin the process of recording the 
details.
You must succeed with 1d3+3 Underground Lore 
skill tests, you may take one test in each dungeon 
section. After you have collected the required 
information, leave and return to your starting point 
to complete the task. Locations: Dungeon.  Mission 
Points: 3.(Running Total 7).
Task 4. Magic.  Magic Lore - Understanding: You are 
faced with a magical puzzle (a set of runes to 
decipher, a magical lock protecting a doorway and so 
on) and you must solve it to progress your quest. 
Make a Magic Lore skill test with a target number of 
15 - if you succeed you have beaten the puzzle, if you 
fail it reacts to your interference by firing a bolt of 
magical energy at you, causing 1d6 points of 
STAMINA damage! You may make three a8empts, 
all must be within the same day, before the puzzle is 
sealed to you forever. You may also a8empt to solve 
the puzzle by blind chance - test your LUCK to 
succeed, but you only get one chance using this 
method. Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. 
Mission Points: 1. (Running Total 8).
Task 5. Diplomacy. Etique8e - Convince: You need to 
convince or persuade people to believe you or do as 
you say. Make 1d6+3 Etique8e skill tests, you must 
succeed in half or more of them. Each one must be 
made whilst in a different location within a 
se8lement. Overall, the task takes at least half a day. 
If you fail you may try again the next day, when you 
have thought of some be8er arguments, but if you fail 
twice the task is failed. Locations: City. Mission 
Points: 1. (Running Total 9).
Task 6. Combat. Fight 1+1d2 easy opponents. Find a 
monster that is appropriate for your hero or use the 
methods detailed at the end of this section to generate 
one. They are slightly weaker (or already injured) and 
have a -1 penalty to their combat, damage and 
armour rolls, but you must fight them all at once. If 
you flee, the task is failed. Locations: City, 
Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 2. (Running 
Total 11).
Task 7. Knowledge. Law - Arguing: You have 
become embroiled in a legal dispute, which may not 
be very heroic but resolving it is the easiest way to 
advance your aims. You must take 1d6+3 Law skill 
tests, you must succeed in half or more of them to 
complete the task. If you fail you have got yourself 
into legal trouble and must roll on the Lawbreaker 
table, though with a minimum result of a seven. This 
task takes up most of the day. Locations: City.  
Mission Points: 1.(Running Total 12).
Task 8. Fight 1d6 opponents in waves: You have 
found yourself the target of a8ack and must defeat a 
number of monsters to proceed. They can be one type 
of monster or a mixture. The order you fight them is 
based on how many there are. Roll 1d6 and then fight 
the groups as follows: 1 - fight alone. 2 - fight 
separately. 3 - fight one, and then two together. 4 - 
fight two pairs. 5 - fight one and then two pairs. 6 - 
fight one, then two, then three together. You have one 
round of rest between each set of monsters and you 
may use that to flee (though this means the task is 
failed and you suffer a setback).  Locations: City, 
Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission Points: 3. (Running 
Total 15)
Task 9. Sneaking - Stakeout: You must stay at or near 
a specific place (location in a se8lement, area in a 
wilderness, section in a dungeon) for 1d3 days (2d6 
hours in a dungeon) and make a Sneaking skill test, 
remembering to roll for encounters as you wait. If 
you stay in place and pass the test, you succeed. If 
you fail, you are spo8ed and a8acked by a monster. 
Locations: City, Wilderness, Dungeon. Mission 
Points: 1. (Running Total 16).


--- PAGE 398 ---

Chapter 10 - Missions, Quests and Adventures
397
Task 10. Fight a Henchman: You have come across a 
Henchman of your Opponent and must fight them. 
Refer to the details for your particular Opponent. If 
you are not fighting against a specific villain you can 
still use Table 9.2.7 'Villain's Henchman’ to create one. 
Defeating them should give some interesting or 
useful progress to your quest. If you flee, this task is 
failed. 
Locations: 
City, 
Wilderness, 
Dungeon. 
Mission Points: 2. (Running Total 18).
Other information: Our hero has previously rolled to 
find out which villain they are dealing with and it is 
‘The Emerald Scale’ from the list of pre-prepared 
opponents given in chapter 9.
Having worked out the basics of our mission, we 
decide to roll for additional information and 
alterations.
Table 10.2.15 Combat Complications - We will leave 
them as a surprise for when the combat happens and 
will not roll for them for encounters which are not 
part of our quest.
Table 10.2.17  Mission Complications - The gods are 
angered by your meddling, lose one point of 
temporary LUCK. Ouch. Painful start, but we have to 
take it on the chin.
Table 10.2.18 Random Mission Timers - No rest: If 
you rest (take part in no tasks) for a day roll 1d6 - on 
a roll of 1 your opponent has taken advantage of your 
sloth to finish their task and your mission is failed 
(Travelling to or from somewhere to carry out your 
mission does not count as a day of rest). This is fairly 
tough and our hero will have to make sure they take 
enough rations, STAMINA potions and other 
restoratives to keep going.
Interpreting the Results
Now that we have all our information, we can read 
through our randomised picks and see if the outline 
for our quest emerges. From the quest hook and the 
nature of our opponent, we decide that we are facing 
some kind of monster unleashed by the lizardmen of 
Silur Cha. A hydra perhaps, and our overall aim is to 
track it down and kill it so we can brag about how 
great we are!
Our mission objective is ‘uncover a piece of 
information or clue that will help you decide what to 
do next’ which in this case will be the location of the 
beast or its controller. So we decide this means we 
aren’t going to fight the beast at the end of this 
mission, that is something we will leave for later.
Now we look at the list of tasks and try to organise 
them into a quest that makes sense, remembering that 
they are suggestions and we can change or rearrange 
them. We can ask ourselves why a hydra on the 
rampage would need us to end up arguing the law, or 
visiting a dungeon or working out the worth of an 
unknown object. The last part, at least, looks obvious 
- we are going to stakeout a place where we can 
intercept and fight a henchman of the Emerald Scale.
After some thought what we come up with is this:
Our hero hears news of villages and farmers being 
terrorised and decides they can make a name for themself 
by killing the beast, but in the city the local lord does not 
want to help. Angered, our hero goes around town trying 
to find out more information about why this is (Task 1). 
The hero discovers that some important people have been 
paid in an unusual coin to advise against helping the local 
villagers - finding examples of these coins as evidence is 
now Task 2, which will be spread across the rest of the 
mission (the coins will be from Lizardman treasuries, 
connecting these events to the Emerald Scale). At this point 
our hero is a3acked by a couple of thugs (Task 6) who want 
to stop them, after which they go to the local lord to 
persuade him he has to act (Task 7). 


--- PAGE 399 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
398
The lord is uncertain and demands our hero explore a 
newly discovered dungeon nearby to prove their loyalty 
(and perhaps hoping to get rid of them). This is Task 3 and 
will require us to create a route to the dungeon, which we 
decide is out in the wilderness. As per the ‘finding a 
random place’ rules we set it 5 areas away from town 
(roughly 50 miles) in the southwest direction. Our hero 
will need to buy food, water and maybe a mount to go there 
as this will take some time. The dungeon can be created 
according to the rules provided in Chapter 5 and filled with 
either random monsters or something related to this quest, 
maybe some Lizardmen.
 In the dungeon we come across a puzzle (Task 4) though 
as our hero has no skill in magic, we change this to require 
a test of our Trap Knowledge skill, by solving the puzzle we 
obtain a magical item that will help us fight the Hydra 
(how convenient!), perhaps something that confuses it so 
not all the heads a3ack our poor lone hero at once.
Returning to the city, we now must convince the local 
nobles (Task 5) of the dangers of the Emerald Scale and help 
us to find the hydra, after which our hero is told that the 
strange coins come from a new trader that arrived in town 
recently.  We go to his house where we must fight his goons 
(Task 8) before we can stage a stakeout (Task 9) to confront 
this henchman (Task 10).
If all goes well, apart from experience and loot we also 
receive some valuable information about our overall 
campaign (defeat the Emerald Scale). In this case, the 
henchman had been paying people off so they would 
convince the nobles to ignore the hydra and that the beast 
is under the control of somebody hiding out in the 
wilderness (probably in a swamp region) - that will form 
the basis of our next mission, should our hero continue to 
pursue it.
As you can see pu3ing the random pieces together into a 
quest that makes sense requires a bit of imagination and 
some tinkering with the tasks, but in the end we can come 
up with a satisfying story.
Conclusion
Creating missions, adventures and quests is one of 
the most fun and rewarding parts of playing a role 
playing game like Advanced Fighting Fantasy. Your 
heroes have an entire world to explore (and with this 
book, a means to map it out and fill it with interesting 
events and places) and it is up to you to work out 
what that means and how you will respond to it. 
There are no limits on what you choose to do - you 
can wander the world, set up trade as a merchant, 
embark on a life of crime and intrigue, pursue arcane 
knowledge, serve the gods or many, many more. This 
section of the book is meant to inspire you and give 
you some tools to get your imagination going, but the 
truth is that you will need to perform the alchemy 
that transforms these base metals into gold. If in 
doubt, trust your imagination - it is the greatest tool 
you have to bring your world to life!


--- PAGE 400 ---

Chapter 11 -Adventurers Guild
399
11 - ADVENTURERS GUILD
All across Titan, brave heroes seek fame and fortune 
through acts of daring. A rough network or society of 
friends, often referred to as the ‘adventurers guild’, 
has grown to support them. They are a combination 
of hangers-on, storytellers, fixers, traders, retired 
adventurers and dile8antes that put themselves at the 
service of heroes to offer them a bit of work and the 
sort of assistance they might not find elsewhere.
 It is rumoured that the guild is run by bards that are 
keen to collect the stories for their tavern tales, an 
idea 
which 
is 
certainly 
consistent 
with 
its 
semi-
organised and informal nature. 
Also, most of the meetings take 
place at an inn or drinking 
establishment which is a bard's 
place of work.
The purpose of including the 
adventurers guild into your 
campaign is to give you an 
additional resource and source 
of quests; the missions they offer 
are not complex, but can usually 
be done in addition to other 
quests and the rewards can 
sometimes be found in other places, but not easily, so 
the guild provides some protection against bad luck.
If you want to pick up a contract from the 
adventurer’s guild or make use of their services this 
can be done by visiting any inn, tavern or drinking 
den in any se8lement. The encounter is not rolled for 
in the usual way; it is simply assumed that an agent 
of the guild can be found if you ask around and wait, 
which usually takes an hour or three (1d3 hours of 
waiting, don’t forget to buy a drink).
Once you have made contact the guild member will, 
after a bit of talking to find out what the hero is up to 
at the moment, suggest a li8le errand or task for the 
hero to carry out in return for which the guild will 
reward them (maybe) and put at their disposal the 
resources they have available - people who trade in 
unusual items or services of the sort that adventurers 
such as yourself might not easily be able to find 
elsewhere. The tasks set by the guild are referred to as 
contracts, though it is all done by handshakes and 
words of honour.
When the request has been fulfilled, simply return to 
any inn, tavern or drinking den 
(it doesn’t need to be the same 
one) in order to complete it. At 
this point you will be able to roll 
to see what reward you get, plus 
you 
get 
access 
to 
the 
adventurers 
guild 
resources. 
The guild's goods and services 
are not a shop as such - your 
hero has a discussion with the 
guild representative who then 
uses their local contacts to bring 
you the item or someone who 
can help you. If your hero wants 
a potion of STAMINA, they may 
know a retired adventurer who 
has one to sell or an apothecary who doesn’t usually 
sell to heroes, if the required service is the removal of 
a curse the guild may bring in a local hedge witch 
that can make the a8empt.
You may only have one guild contract active at a time 
and you can only complete two such contracts within 
one week (they only have so many things that need 
doing). If you want to, you can abandon a contract 
and obtain a new one by going back and talking to the 
guild agent again. They are pre8y relaxed about these 
things but do insist you think about it for a while - 
you must wait until the next day to ask for a different 
contract.


--- PAGE 401 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
400
Table 11.1 Adventurer’s Guild Contracts. If refused, you can check again the next day.
3d6 
Description of the Contract offered by the Guild
3 
For reasons the guild doesn’t want to explain, they need you to keep a low profile for the next few days. 
They won’t say why but it’s clearly important to them. They know that isn’t easy, but if you can avoid 
all combat for the next three days, you will be rewarded.
4 
Rumour Monger. The guild is concerned that it is not up to speed with the latest news - they have tasked 
you to get your ear to the ground and find out what is happening out there. Listen to six rumours - as 
rolled on the Rumours table - then report back to complete the contract.
5 
Clear the Catacombs. All manner of terrible creatures have been crawling out of the ground and 
harassing the peasantry! Whilst some losses are acceptable, too many and people could start panicking. 
Find a catacomb or dungeon, enter it and clear it out (investigate at least six rooms) then return to the 
agent.
6 
Bring some cheer: Visit Inns, Taverns or Drinking Dens and see what you can do to provide 
entertainment to the locals - tell a tale, sing a song or perhaps a magic show! You must make an 
appropriate skill roll (you may choose any skill you feel could be used to provide some sort of show). 
You must succeed 5 times before the guild is satisfied with your work.
7 
Local Knowledge: The guild is concerned about the state of its local knowledge. Have four ‘map 
encounters’ in a se8lement or travel through four wilderness areas or dungeon sections then return to 
the guild agent to pass on your findings.
8 
Sizing up the entertainment: Visit Inns, Taverns or Drinking Dens and see what sort of entertainment is 
on offer. You should spend an hour at least in each location and make a City Lore or Etique8e skill roll 
to gather sufficient information - you need to succeed 5 times in different spots to compile a decent 
report. You can carry out other encounters whilst you are there.
9 
Spreading the News. For reasons that won’t be explained to you, no ma8er how much you charm, beg 
or threaten, the guild wants you to spread certain rumours for them. After explaining them to you (and 
ge8ing you to repeat them several times) you are sent out to do your worst. Each time you have a social 
encounter, make an Etique8e roll with a +2 bonus to pass on your gossip. You must succeed ten times 
with ten different people in order to complete your contract. The Etique8e skill test can be done 
alongside other options, apart from a8acking!
10 
Tooth collection. The guild needs someone to collect teeth from evil humanoids. Reasons are unclear, but 
that is the request. Each time you defeat an evil humanoid (orc, goblin, ratman etc) you can extract 1d3 
teeth from them. Collect 10 to complete the contract.
11 
Go be a Hero! All the guild wants you to do is to go out and be heroic, to show the people that someone 
is out there fighting for them. Complete seven ‘fighting’ encounters (in a se8lement or the wilderness) or 
clear one section of a dungeon and then return to the agent for your reward.
12 
A merchant needs a set of documents to be delivered to a nearby se8lement - you are given the 
documents in a sealed container. You must take them to a tavern or inn in another se8lement to complete 
the contract.
13 
Help the shepherds: Incidences of wild animal a8acks are on the rise - the guild wants you to go out into 
the wilderness and do something. In any nearby area, find and defeat a wild animal, returning its hide 
to the guild as proof.


--- PAGE 402 ---

Chapter 11 -Adventurers Guild
401
3d6 
Description of the Contract offered by the Guild
14 
A collector’s request: A wealthy citizen has 
asked the guild to help them build up a 
collection of precious objects. Find any piece 
of treasure worth more than 20gp and bring 
it to a guild representative to pass along.
15 
Aid the Watch: Criminal behaviour is 
ge8ing out of control. If you accept the 
contract, your next  encounter in the 
se8lement will be C16 - Cu8hroats. You 
must defeat rather than bribe them to 
complete the contract. In addition to the 
guild reward, your next roll on the 
Lawbreaker table has a +2 bonus due to your 
good reputation.
16 
Espionage: The guild wants you to spy on 
the nobility. You must make a combined 
Sneaking and Awareness skill test (roll both 
skill tests needing to pass both) in the Keep, 
Theatre or Wealthy Streets locations as you 
carry out surveillance. You need to succeed 
3 times on 3 different days, each act of 
surveillance takes up 1d3 hours. Once you 
have completed your task, bring your 
information to a guild representative.
17 
Messenger service. The agent hands you a 
sealed envelope with instructions for its 
delivery. Roll or drop a dice onto your city 
map and note the nearest location, once you 
get there you complete this simple mission. If you wish to, you can open the le8er and read the contents 
- a series of reports about what is going on in this se8lement, wri8en in the form of a le8er. You add +1 
to your next City Lore roll, but there is a chance your curiosity has been noticed. Make a Sleight of Hand 
skill roll. If you fail, the guild will not reward you for this contract and not allow access to their stock.
18 
It’s somewhat embarrassing, but the guild insists they have underpaid your previous services and are 
determined that they give you something extra - consider this mission to be completed instantly, roll for 
your reward as usual and then pick up another mission immediately if you want. You may not roll this 
result twice in a row. Restore one point of LUCK.


--- PAGE 403 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
402
Once you have completed your contract, you must go 
to an Inn, Tavern or Drinking Den in order to find a 
guild agent and obtain your reward. You don’t know 
how, but they all seem to know what you were 
required to do. Messenger pigeon perhaps?
Table 11.2 Adventurer’s Guild Contract Rewards
1d6 
Reward
1 
It seems the Guild is temporarily short of funds so cannot provide you with any gold. Sorry. Instead you 
have the thanks of the Guild and they offer you a discount of 5gp on the purchase of one service or item.
2 
The agent listens carefully to your story, but doesn’t seem that excited by any of it. She hands you a 
pouch containing 2d6 gold pieces and bids you goodbye.
3 
The agent you meet is obviously quite drunk. You have to tell them you’ve succeeded several times 
before they get it and whilst asking about your reward they wander off to the bar for another round of 
drinks, offering you one as they go. It seems there is no cash reward but talking to them reveals some 
interesting things about this location. Roll once on the rumours table 8.7 - Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & 
Events and add +1 to your next City Lore roll.
4 
The agent is satisfied with your work and promises to recommend you to his contacts. She is obviously 
keen to get on with some other activity and gives you a pouch containing 3d6 gold pieces before she 
hurries away with a deliberately dramatic swish of her cape.
5 
This ag ent is hard to find and once you make contact, leads you off to a small side room of the inn where 
you can talk privately. She passes you a pouch containing 2d6 gold pieces, but not before talking to you 
at length about some ma8ers of concern to her. Add +2 to your next City Lore roll.
6 
The Guild agent is quite enthralled by your exploits and full of praise for your heroism. They give you a 
pouch containing 4d6 gold pieces and promise to tell tales of your renown. Gain +1 to Etique8e, Bargain 
or Leadership skill tests in this se8lement for the next week, due to your good reputation.
Adventurers Guild Goods & Services
The agents of the adventurers guild often come across 
unusual or potent items that lie far outside the 
normal equipment available at merchants, or have 
contacts within the se8lement that can provide those 
goods or interesting services.
Once you have completed a contract for the guild, 
you may purchase one item or service from this list. 
For the guild agent to find and deliver the item or 
service takes about one hour, and no theft is possible 
as they do not carry a large stock of valuable items 
around with them! The agent will ask you to wait 
whilst they find a way to fulfil your demands. Due to 
very limited availability, you may only purchase one 
item or service each time you complete a contract.
The 
Volatile Alchemy 
Rule 
(Optional): 
The 
adventurers guild provides your hero with the option to 
purchase a number of minor magical items, such as potions 
of STAMINA. This can lead to a desire for your hero to 
stock up on such items and carry around a veritable 
apothecaries laboratory of clinking vials and flasks. 
Under the rules of Advanced Fighting Fantasy there is no 
particular limit to this (though 10 such items should 
occupy one inventory slot) and not much in the way of 
rules to decide if potentially delicate things are broken or 
damaged during combat.
For this reason we suggest the ‘volatile alchemy’ rule, 
which is as follows: A hero may only carry one of each type 
of magical potion or vial at any time, if they carry more 
than one both will spoil as their magic interferes with each 
other. So a hero can carry a potion of STAMINA and a 


--- PAGE 404 ---

Chapter 11 -Adventurers Guild
403
potion of LUCK without a problem, but if they have two 
potions of STAMINA they will find that both will spoil 
within a day.
This does limit your hero somewhat, but also reflects the 
fact that whilst you could perhaps carry a few potions 
around safely, anyone carrying a large number of vials or 
flasks would surely find that many of them got broken 
during combat or other heroic activities.
Adventurer Guild Goods - you may purchase one 
item each time you complete a contract. 
●  200gp -  Potion of LUCK. Restores your LUCK 
to its maximum value. 
● 40gp - Potion of STAMINA. Restores your 
STAMINA to its maximum value. 
● 70gp - Potion of MAGIC. Restores your MAGIC 
to its maximum value. 
● 150gp - Potion of SKILL. Restores your SKILL to 
its maximum value. 
● 15gp - Silver dust elixir: This vial of shimmering 
oil can be used to coat a weapon or 10 bolts or 
arrows so that they are considered ‘silvered’ for 
the purposes of fighting creatures that can only be 
hurt by silver weapons. The coating wears off after 
about ten minutes. 
● 15gp - Oil of Filash: This thick reddy-brown oil 
which stings the hands can be worked on to a 
weapon or 10 bolts or arrows such that they will 
burst into fire when a blow is struck, causing one 
point of additional fire damage. 
● 20gp - Travellers Potion of Cooling / Warming: 
These small potion vials contain either a blue 
liquid that smells of mint (potion of cooling) or a 
reddish brown liquid with a spicy, acrid tang 
(potion of warming). Consuming the appropriate 
one will provide a bonus of +3 to resist the effects 
of exposure for one day and will protect the hero 
against severe, but not magical or very extreme 
temperatures (so they will be able to hold their 
hand in a flame for longer than usual, but will be 
burned by a furnace or a fire bolt). 
● 30gp - Flash Powder Jar - A small glass vial, 
sealed, contains what appears to be swirling black 
smoke. If hurled to the ground and smashed it will 
fill an area of 5’ radius with thick, choking smoke 
for one round of combat. This allows you to 
withdraw from combat and flee without suffering 
the usual penalty. 
● 30gp -Goblin Potion - a small stoppered pot 
contains a vile smelling brown liquid. Drinking it 
fills your veins with a burst of fiery energy, 
allowing you to a8ack with greater force. For the 
duration of one combat, add +2 to your damage 
rolls, but afterwards you vomit. Violently (if 
another combat starts immediately, you have -2 to 
your combat rolls for 3 rounds as you recover, 
otherwise you just have an urgent need to clean 
your boots). 
● 30gp - Pouch of Spider Glue  - this soft leather 
pouch contains a sticky white gum which can be 
worked on to your hands and feet to hugely 
increase your grip. If you use the glue you can gain 
a +6 bonus to any test of your Climbing special 
skill. There is enough glue in the pouch for one 
use. 


--- PAGE 405 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
404
● 30gp - Magicians Wax - a small lump of 
iridescent wax which can be rubbed onto one 
weapon or 10 bolts or arrows allowing them to 
hurt creatures that can only be hurt by magical or 
silvered weapons. Lasts for ten minutes before the 
effect fades. 
● 30gp - Power Crystal - A small velvet pouch 
contains an egg sized purple crystal that twinkles 
with a shifting radiance. Crushing the crystal - 
usually done by dramatically dropping it and 
grinding it with your bootheel - releases a burst of 
magical energy that can be used to add a bonus of 
+4 to a Sorcery or Wizardry spell roll made in the 
same round. Obviously, it only has one use. 
● 20gp - vial of holy water. This small vial of clear 
water sparkles slightly even in dim light. You may 
use it to deal 2d6 points of damage to an undead 
creature, instantly. It has one use. 
● 20gp - disguise kit - a pouch of items such as 
makeup and false moustaches that could be 
helpful in creating a disguise. It has enough 
material for 3 uses, each use grants a +2 bonus to 
the Disguise skill. 
● 20gp - Faded Map. This old piece of parchment 
shows you the location of a Catacomb. Drop or roll 
a dice onto your city map - when you move to that 
location, 
you 
can 
automatically 
take 
the 
‘Catacombs entrance’ as your encounter. 
● 500gp - Idol of salvation. This rare and very 
powerful magical item, which takes the form of a 
crudely sculpted clay figurine of about 6’’ in size, 
has the effect of saving your life! If you have it in 
your possession when you are reduced to zero 
points of STAMINA the figurine will sha8er, 
reviving you and healing you for 3+1d6 points of 
STAMINA. You can only carry one figurine at a 
time and it only has one use. It takes up one 
inventory slot. 
● 20gp - Healing Draught - this semi-magical 
draught will cure you of one disease or poison, 
automatically. 
● 30gp - Sparkling Broach - this gaudy piece of 
jewellery sparkles with all the cheap bravado of a 
stage prop, but carries a secret. If the broach is 
rubbed and displayed prominently it releases a 
series of hypnotising sparkles, giving you a bonus 
of +2 on one Etique8e, Bargain or Leadership skill 
roll. It has one use, after which it breaks apart into 
small pieces of dull grey stone. 
● Firesplinter - 2g - a bundle of ten small twigs 
dipped in Firepowder along with a small striking 
stone, can be used to instantly light a torch or other 
flammable object with a skill roll. 
● 15gp - Flask of Acid. A somewhat delicate vial of 
acid that can be thrown at a target for 1d6 points 
of damage, if you hit (thrown weapons combat 
roll). Also causes 1d3 points of splash damage to 
anyone adjacent to your target. It is fragile and if 
you are knocked prone or suffer falling damage 
you must test your LUCK or have it burst and 
inflict 1d6 damage to you. 
● 15gp - Flask of Fire Oil. A somewhat delicate vial 
of oil that bursts into flame when exposed to air. It 
can be thrown at a target for 1d6 points of damage, 
if you hit (thrown weapons combat roll). Also 
causes 1d3 points of fire damage to anyone 
adjacent to your target. Any flammable targets hit 
will catch fire. It is fragile and if you are knocked 
prone or suffer falling damage you must test your 
LUCK or have it burst and inflict 1d6 damage to 
you.


--- PAGE 406 ---

Chapter 11 -Adventurers Guild
405
Adventurer’s Guild Services - you may purchase 
one item each time you complete a contract.  In 
addition to the stock that can be accessed via the 
guild, the various bards, storytellers and travelling 
merchants also pick up information and knowledge 
that might be of use to a brave hero such as yourself. 
Once you have contacted the guild, as well as picking 
up (or finishing) a quest, you can make use of their 
services.
Of course, they are not highly qualified sages and 
most of them are busy with their own activities so 
they can only offer a limited amount of advice - you 
can make use of one service each time you contact a 
guild member.
● 5gp - Find a Se8lement - bards, gleemen and 
peddlers travel the world and know its places. For 
a small fee they will sit and give you detailed 
directions to a village in any nearby wilderness (an 
adjacent area, so within 10 miles). Directions 
include a path to the village, though they will not 
come to guide you. 
● 10gp - Answer one question of learning - this can 
be used to help in a quest. The question can be 
related to Animal, Religion, World, City or Magic 
Lore, City, Evaluate, Languages or Law skills. 
Once payment is made, roll 1d6 - on a roll of 1 you 
have been given the wrong answer (not 
deliberately, they just got it wrong). No refunds 
are available. 
● 10gp - Shelter or smuggle out - a hero can stay in 
this location (drinking den, inn or tavern) for one 
day or be quietly smuggled out of the se8lement to 
an adjacent location or area, all out of sight of The 
Watch. During this time you cannot complete any 
other tasks, as you are being hidden away out of 
sight. 
● 20gp - A8empt to cure a curse - guild members 
know that adventures are often the subject of 
terrible curses and keep various charms and 
scrolls to hand to help, though these are 
unreliable. After paying, roll 1d6. On a 3-6 your 
curse is removed, on a 1-2 the curse removal kit 
has no effect. No refunds will be given. 
● 50gp - Ask for help! You can, in desperation, ask 
the adventurers guild for help with your current 
quest. If you choose this option, you may complete 
one of your quest objectives automatically, 
provided it is related to information gathering, 
subterfuge or diplomacy. The guild will not fight 
on your behalf and they don’t like to be directly 
involved - this option can only be chosen once for 
any mission the hero undertakes.


--- PAGE 407 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
406
Summary
The Adventurers Guild is an optional addition to 
your game which adds some extra variety to the 
activities of your hero and the rewards available to 
them. You can ignore this option or alter it to suit 
your campaign and se8ing and you can add new 
items and services as rewards as you see fit. 
It also provides something of a pseudo-base for a solo 
player, without having to worry about tracking such 
a base.  Missions can be found here, equipment and 
treasure can be stashed and the hero can even stay at 
a Guildhouse between adventures.  Feel free to detail 
this in as much or li8le detail as you wish.


--- PAGE 408 ---

Chapter 12 -Adventure Consequences and Rewards
407
12 - ADVENTURE CONSEQUENCES AND REWARDS
At the end of each part of an adventure the heroes 
should expect some rewards or consequences for 
their actions. These can be divided into experience, 
social rewards, treasure and other rewards.
The exact nature of any rewards will depend heavily 
on how you wish your campaign to progress in the 
long run, so whilst we can offer some guidelines it 
will be up to you to decide exactly what happens. For 
example, if you award a certain amount of experience 
points for each session of gameplay then your heroes 
will advance at a different rate to those in a campaign 
where experience is only awarded when certain tasks 
or milestones are completed.
This can be a difficult balance to get right. If the 
rewards of completing a quest or mission are too 
meagre it may be demotivating - why bother if 
nothing happens as a result - but similarly, if the 
rewards are too strong you can quickly find yourself 
in the position where nothing in the game offers your 
heroes much of a challenge. Even a relatively novice 
hero, if laden with the best equipment and magical 
items, can be overpowering. 
As a piece of general advice, if you are unsure about 
how to progress it is be8er to start with small rewards 
and build up; essentially a case of being cautious with 
progress. If you provide too much advancement at 
the start you can face difficult decisions about how to 
challenge a hero or bring them back down to a 
reasonable level of power.
The amount and quality of rewards should be in 
proportion  to the nature of the quest or mission - 
something easy, like delivering a parcel from one 
village to another, should provide a small amount of 
experience and maybe a few gold but nothing more. 
The rewards discussed in this section are, in general, 
intended to be given for completing longer or more 
challenging quests. Apart from experience, do not 
feel obliged to hand out rewards for everything a 
hero does. The most common reward for finishing an 
adventure is they have survived and have the chance 
to take on a new challenge.
Experience Rewards
In order to improve your Hero you need to gain 
experience points to spend. The exact rate at which 
you do so will have a big impact on how your game 
develops - if you earn experience too quickly you will 
rapidly overpower your challenges, if you gain it too 
slowly you will find the game unrewarding.
As a general rule we suggest you gain between 10 to 
50 points of experience for each ‘session’ of 
gameplay, such as an evening. The exact amount 
depends on what you have accomplished - if you 
have spent most of the session buying new clothing 
for your hero, you should award less than if you have 
bested a troublesome foe in a mighty ba8le! 
Some examples might be helpful, but the awarding of 
experience is very much a subjective choice.
Hero of Stonebridge


--- PAGE 409 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
408
Table 12.1 Examples of typical experience awards
Actions Typical  
XP 
Examples (Hero refers to both a solo player or a group)
Very trivial 
 
1-2 
Pass some skill tests not related to combat but advance your goals
Travel some distance to their goals
Discover some minor information by using your social skills
Buy or sell some goods using your Bargaining skills
Trivial  
 
2-3 
Fight a weak (lower SKILL) enemy or one they significantly outnumber
Take on an athletic challenge
Convince someone to aid you
Travel a short distance
Moderate 
 
3-5 
Fight a moderate (equal SKILL) enemy or a group of weaker enemies that 
outnumber the heroes
Take on a risky athletic challenge
Travel a significant distance
Outwit an enemy instead of fighting them
Difficult 
 
5-10 
Fight moderate (equal SKILL) enemies that outnumber the heroes or fight a 
stronger (higher SKILL) enemy that the heroes outnumber.
Take on a potentially deadly athletic challenge
Win a combat through ingenuity rather than simple force of arms
Very Difficult  
10-20 Fight a stronger (higher SKILL) enemy that also outnumbers the heroes
Convince an enemy to become an ally
Travel a great distance in haste or whilst under a8ack
Legendary 
 
20-30 Defeat a significant villain and end their plans
Accomplish a long term and major goal for your hero
Defeat a mighty monster such as a dragon or vampire
It can also be appropriate to decide the award of 
experience based on milestones. As a suggestion, you 
might award 10 experience for each campaign 
mission completed, 5 experience for each adventurers 
guild, minor mission or catacomb completed, 1 
experience for each challenge encounter faced and 20 
experience when you defeat an opponent (a major 
villain or antagonist in your campaign). The specific 
amounts will depend on how long it takes you to 
complete each milestone and how difficult they were.
Individual vs Group Awards: If you are playing as a 
group of heroes the question arises as to whether you 
are going to give individual rewards based on what 
each hero did, or give every hero the same amount 
based on what the group achieved. This is something 
you will have to decide for yourself and whilst both 
approaches can work, working out individual 
experience point totals is more time consuming and 
difficult than providing everyone in the group with 
the same amount.
Spending experience: Use the rules as described in 
the Advanced Fighting Fantasy core rulebook to 
spend your experience points. As noted in Chapter 3, 
we highly recommend that special skills are limited 
to at most half of your SKILL or MAGIC 
characteristic, rounded down, as suggested in the  
Advanced Fighting Fantasy Combat Companion. 
This provides a more balanced progression for your 
heroes. This means that a Hero with SKILL of 6 or 7 
would be allowed to put at most 3 points in their 
Swords special skill until they increase their SKILL to 
8 or 9.


--- PAGE 410 ---

Chapter 12 -Adventure Consequences and Rewards
409
This prevents heroes from becoming too specialised 
in one area; it is particularly relevant for combat 
where a focused warrior can outpace the challenges 
provided in the bestiaries.
Social Rewards - Consequences of Success or Failure
A hero might well find that people have noticed their 
behaviour! Part of becoming a great hero is that you 
are no longer an anonymous face in the crowd, for 
good or ill. If they have proved their heroism by 
defeating their foes, they might gain in social status 
or receive a monetary reward but if they have failed, 
they could find they are shunned and mistrusted. As 
usual these consequences are suggestions - your 
campaign or se8ing might have specific results for 
success or failure which you or your Director have 
already decided upon.
Social rewards should only apply to the harder quests 
- just defeating a few goblins isn’t likely to cause 
much of a reaction from your fellow citizens. You 
need to have done something (or failed to do 
something) which people are likely to notice. Saving 
the city from a8ack, defeating an evil wizard, aiding 
the victims of a plague - the sort of quests described 
in the ‘campaign missions’ section of this book are 
sufficiently complex that strangers may notice your 
efforts.
Table 12.2 Consequences of Success
2d6 
Consequence
2 
No consequence. As you stand there in your moment of triumph, you look around and realise that all of 
your efforts have gone completely unnoticed. The wider world carries on as before, barely pausing for a 
breath to consider your heroism. Is this such a bad thing? It depends on whether or not you were 
pursuing glory. If so, you will have to find it elsewhere.
3 
 A lord or lady notices your heroism; they invite you to their home for a night of feasting after which they 
gift you a non-magical item worth up to 100gp! (Pick one item of your choice from the equipment list).
4 
Your achievements are noted by your peers, make a roll to see if you can increase your Social Status (see 
section 7.2).
5 
A great feast is held in your honour; add +1 to your Etique8e skill rolls for one week as you bask in the 
adulation..
6 
An alchemist offers you either a Potion of STAMINA or Potion of Curing (removes one poison or disease) 
as a thankyou for your heroism.
7 
A collection is held amongst the peasants to thank you for efforts; it raises 3d6gp.
8 
You are filled with confidence - you have +1 to your skill tests for one special skill (your choice) for the 
next week.
9 
Follower: A fledgeling hero is so impressed by your efforts they offer to travel with you. She has SKILL  
6 STAMINA 10 LUCK 8 Weapon: Mace Armour: Chainmail Cuirass and Small Shield. She will stay with 
you for one campaign mission or two weeks, whichever is shorter.
10 
Your achievements are noted by your peers, make a roll to see if you can increase your Social Status.(see 
section 7.2).
11 
Tutor: A skilled tutor takes you under her wing and offers you some tricks and tips - you permanently 
increase your skill points in a one special skill (e.g. Region Lore-Forest) by one point, subject to the usual 
restrictions.
12 
The gods smile on you, increase your maximum and temporary LUCK score by one.


--- PAGE 411 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
410
Table 12.3 Consequences of Failure
2d6 
Consequence
2 
The gods curse your failure. Your maximum and temporary LUCK scores fall by one point.
3 
 The evil eye: A suspicion arises that you might be cursed. Until you succeed in a mission you have a -1 
penalty to Etique8e, Leadership and Bargain skill rolls, but +1 to Con.
4 
Your failure is noted by your peers; roll a test against your Social Status to see if you are demoted. (see 
section 7.2).
5 
Theft: Seemingly in retribution for your mistakes, you are targeted by a thief. Roll 1d6 for each item in  
your possession - on a roll of 1 it has been stolen as you sleep!
6 
Poor reputation - your name is mud and you suffer -1 to your Etique8e skills for one week.
7 
Mistrust: For the next week, you can’t Call Upon the Aid of any people you meet.
8 
Revenge: Although you were not the cause of the events, someone has targeted you for retribution. The 
next time you are in combat in a se8lement you will be a8acked by a vengeful warrior SKILL 6 
STAMINA 9 Weapon: Sword Armour: Leather Hauberk and small shield. They will flee once reduced to 
3 STAMINA or less.
9 
You lose confidence in your abilities. One of your special skills - pick one that you have the most points 
in - suffers a -1 penalty for one week as you recover your poise.
10 
Your failure is noted by your peers; roll a test against your Social Status to see if you are demoted. (see 
section 7.2).
11 
A guilty conscience about your failings means you donate 3d6gp to the poor and needy next time you 
are in a se8lement.
12 
No consequence. As you contemplate your failure, you look around and realise that all of your efforts   
have gone completely unnoticed. The wider world carries on as before, barely pausing for a breath. You 
 
have escaped punishment for your lack of heroism and resolve to do be8er next time.
Social Status: As you complete your missions and 
defeat opponents you can keep track of your status as 
you progress to see what effect it has on your 
interactions with the populace. Of course, you must 
decide what sort of heroic figure you are. You could 
be a folk hero, like Robin Hood, determined to do 
good deeds for the population in return for nothing 
more than their good will, or if you are a priest you 
could decide to take your role in the church seriously 
and try to rise amongst the clergy. See section 7.2 
‘Social Status & Rank’ for more details of what you 
could choose as your profession or social group.
This is entirely optional, but you should consider 
how your actions might be perceived by the people 
you are saving. Once you take on the role of hero, you 
are no longer just a face in the crowd. 
Treasure Rewards
The greatest treasure from your adventures are the 
memories you made on the way, right? Well of course 
as a hero you might want a bit more than that. In 
terms of gold and treasure chapter 13 provides tables 
to work out what you find during your adventures 
and these should be sufficient on their own to keep 
your hero supplied with gold and special items. 
However, you may wish to provide additional gold 
or gear as a specific reward for completing a quest.
 If you wish to do this, you can use the treasure tables 
given in chapter 13 to do so; they will allow you to 
generate treasures ranging from the very minor up to 
a great fortune. Although it is nice for your hero to 
receive a large sum of money this can have an impact 
on the difficulty of your campaign. A hero that 
rapidly acquires the best armour, weapons and 


--- PAGE 412 ---

Chapter 12 -Adventure Consequences and Rewards
411
magical assistance is very significantly stronger than 
one who has to work slowly towards it.
For that reason, and because treasure will be found 
by heroes as a natural part of adventuring, we do not 
offer any specific list or set of tables to generate 
treasure rewards. If you wish to include them there 
are a number of sources of inspiration.
* The Advanced Fighting Fantasy Encyclopedia 
Arcana I contains many ideas for treasures and 
magical items.
* Each of the Fighting Fantasy books set in Titan 
contain magical and non-magical treasures you 
can bring into your game.
* Both the core Advanced Fighting Fantasy 
rulebook and many of the supplements and game 
books contain ideas for treasures of various kinds.
Other Rewards & Punishments
As well as those listed above there are an endless 
number of other rewards it is possible to provide to 
your heroes for their successes and of course an 
equally endless number of ways they could be 
punished. Each of the missions detailed in section 
10.1 include a ‘special reward for success’ to show 
you how you can match these rewards with your 
quests, some further examples to feed your 
imagination are:
* Learn what is the next step of your quest. In a 
long series of quests, often called a campaign, the 
purpose of one adventure or mission is often to 
find out what needs to be done next. This is 
probably the most common type of additional 
reward a hero can gain from completing a quest.
* Access to a special type of training. Perhaps you 
have decided that your hero wants to learn a type 
of magic or a peculiar skill (such as how to use a 
whip in combat). Gaining access to someone who 
can teach you could be a quest reward.
* Access to a mentor. A mentor is someone who 
has the ability to pass on their knowledge in a way 
you understand - having a teacher like this could 
reduce the experience point cost of improving a 
particular skill.
* The enmity of a group. This could come about 
due to success or failure in your labours. If you 
vanquish an enemy, you might find that their 
allies come after you. If you fail in a quest, it might 
be that someone powerful holds you responsible 
and intends to make you pay for it! Consider 
creating a faction (section 7.3) or villain (section 
9.2) that will pursue you.
* Acceptance by closed group or society. This 
could be a secret society, or one that is known but 
only open by invitation (such as an order of 
knights or college of sages). As a result of your 
heroics they decide to seek you out and offer you 
a chance to join. Exactly what the benefits (or 
requirements) of this are up to you. Similarly, if 
you fail a mission you could be asked to leave a 
group that you are a member of.
* Revelation of a secret truth. This could be 
anything of importance to you or quests that you 
are undertaking, but it should be something that 
can only be discovered in special circumstances 
(that you happen to find yourself in)


--- PAGE 413 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
412
* Transport across a great distance. For what 
reason and to where is up to you. You might be 
offered a chance to join the crew of a renowned 
sailing ship or accompany a merchant on a long 
caravan journey. What you see and do on the way 
can be a great source of adventure.
* Making a political or social decision (i.e your 
reward is to say who gets to keep a piece of 
territory or whether or not two people should 
marry). Perhaps your exploits as a hero have made 
you the obvious person to turn to or the only one 
that everyone respects. For whatever reason the 
choice - and its consequences - are yours.
* A title or nickname such as ‘ogre slayer’ or ‘spell 
weaver’. Not uncommon for a brave hero and 
whilst a few more confident adventurers will give 
themselves a moniker, most wait and find out 
what the citizens call them. Just hope it’s 
something complimentary as ‘the Baldheaded’ or 
‘Bluntsword’ are also possibilities.
* The trust of a powerful ally. Your feats have 
earned you the trust and assistance of a powerful 
ally - a patron or group that has decided to 
support and protect you. Exactly what you gain 
from this you will have to find out, but it could 
include some financial assistance, access to 
contacts or even a companion to travel with.
* A holding or property. A wealthy individual, 
probably a noble or merchant, decides to grant 
you deeds to a holding which generates a small 
amount of wealth each year or grants you the lease 
to a property, which you can then use as a home 
base.
* A holiday or time to relax. For whatever reason, 
you now find that the world is momentarily at 
peace and you have some time to relax and wind 
down. What you do with this time is up to you, 
but a period of calm should at least allow you to 
heal your wounds, recover from diseases and 
maybe even restore a point of temporary LUCK.
Conclusion
The rewards for success or punishments for failure 
are ultimately for you to decide. We strongly suggest 
that you keep them proportional - the hardest 
challenges should offer more than tasks that are 
easily accomplished, but the extent to which your 
heroes make progress is a ma8er of personal taste 
and the nature of your campaign. You may want to 
play a short campaign in which your hero rapidly 
ascends in power and status, or you might decide that 
it is more satisfying to let them develop slowly. The 
ideas in this section should provide you with the 
tools and ideas you need to make those decisions.


--- PAGE 414 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
413
13 - TREASURE
What would an adventure be without treasure? Of 
course, not all heroes risk their lives for the rewards 
of gold and pillage but let’s be honest - many do!
There are several possible ways to handle treasure; 
the best is probably to work how generous you want 
your campaign to be. If you expect your hero(es) to 
end up as rich lords and ladies, you will need to 
provide them with suitably large piles of gold; if you 
think they should endure a tough, gri8y existence of 
barely scraping by you should keep the treasure to a 
minimum. The quantity of magic items found also 
has an impact on the difficulty levels - a hero with a 
blazing sword of fire will deal with enemies a lot 
easier. Providing large numbers of magic items will 
increase the power level of your heroes quickly and is 
suitable for a ‘high fantasy’ se8ing whereas keeping 
the number of magical items low will slow down 
progress and can also lead to problems if the hero 
faces a monster that can only be damaged by magical 
items! These questions should be considered by the 
Director along with the heroes to come to a level 
everyone is happy with. If you are unsure, it’s best to 
start off by providing small amounts of treasure and 
only the weakest types of magic items and build up 
from there, this is generally more enjoyable than 
handing out huge piles of gold and magic items at the 
start and then realising you have to hold back your 
heroes or have them lose some of their treasure to 
reset the balance.
In this chapter we provide tables that will allow you 
to generate treasures for each creature you defeat as 
you go along, which is one of the possible methods 
you can use. The intention is that your hero will be 
fairly well rewarded for their efforts, particularly 
when defeating more powerful foes, but there are 
other options you can pursue.
* Assign treasure directly - for each monster or 
enemy you defeat, decide for yourself how much 
they have in the way of wealth and valuable items. 
This is time consuming but the advantage is that 
you have a lot of control over how much treasure 
the hero finds.
* Give rewards for major events - instead of 
finding gold and treasure on each enemy, you can 
assign rewards for ge8ing to significant milestones 
- completing a long quest, defeating a powerful 
enemy and so on. The reward could be wealth or 
valuable items, including magical items. The 
advantage is that you don’t have to worry about 
treasure too much during the adventures.
* Use the tables provided in this chapter to 
randomly generate treasure as you progress. This 
may give more or less than you expect, but the 
advantage is that you don’t have to plan it out.
* Big fights only - only roll to generate treasure for 
some fights, the ones you think are most 
challenging or most likely to result in finding 
something interesting. For the rest you can apply 
a simple rule such as finding 1d6gp worth of items 
on a humanoid and nothing on monsters or 
creatures such as elementals. This is a fast method 
that still includes the chance of finding something 
exciting.
A more comprehensive and detailed method of 
generating treasure is provided in the Advanced 
Fighting Fantasy Encyclopedia Arcana and further 
ideas for treasures and magical items can be found in 
many of the Advanced Fighting Fantasy supplements 
and game books, as well as in the core rulebook.


--- PAGE 415 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
414
As with many parts of this book, the tables are 
intended 
to 
provide 
a 
framework 
for 
your 
imagination, not a straitjacket, and you should use 
them with that in mind. In particular, the number and 
variety of possible magical items your hero could find 
far exceeds the scope of this book - consider those 
tables in particular to be inspirational rather than 
definitive.
Treasure Tables
In this section are the treasure tables which are 
consistent with the more detailed set of rules given in 
the Advanced 
Fighting 
Fantasy 
Encyclopedia 
Arcana; start by rolling on table 13.1 ‘Combined 
Treasure Table’ and from there roll on the tables that 
cover Everyday Items, Coins, Valuables, Consumable 
Items and Magic Items as indicated by the result.
 For example, if you defeat a monster with SKILL 8 
and roll a 10 on 2d6 you should roll for your treasure 
on tables B4 and C1 (The fourth column of the coin 
table and the first column of the valuables table).
These 
tables 
are 
designed 
to 
be 
somewhat 
conservative making treasures hard to come by. As 
usual, you should modify them as you see fit.
13.1 Combined Treasure Table. Roll 2d6 and then use the other treasure tables to discover your loot.
Type of Foe Defeated (N = No treasure!)
Humanoid 
 
          Monsters  
                                                   Other
2d6 
Poor 
Avg 
Rich 
   Minion 
Beast   
Mighty  
Less 
 
Std 
 
Gtr
   SKILL  
SKILL  
SKILL   
SKILL   
SKILL  
SKILL
   1-6 
 
 7-9 
 
10+ 
 
1-6 
 
 7-9 
 
10+
2-3 
N 
N 
A 
   N 
 
N 
 
N 
 
N 
 
N 
 
N
4-5 
A 
A 
B3 
   N 
 
B1 
 
B3 
 
N 
 
B1 
 
C1
6-7 
B1 
B1 
B4,C1    B1 
 
B3 
 
B4,C1  
B1 
 
C1 
 
B3,C1
8-9 
A,B1 
A,B3 
B5,D1    B2 
 
B3,D1  
B5,D1  
B1 
 
D1 
 
B4,D1
10 
B2 
A,B4, B5,C2,    B3 
 
B4,C1  
B5,C2,D2 
C1 
 
B4,D2  
B5,C2,
D1 
D1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D2
11 
B2,C1 B4,C1 B5,C3,    B3,C1 
B4,D2  
B5,C3,D3 
D1 
 
B4,C2  
B5,C3,
D3 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D3
12 
B3,C1 B5,C2, B6,C4,    B3,D2 
B5,C2,E 
B6,C4,E 
B3,C1  
B5,C3,E 
B6,C4,
D2 
E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E


--- PAGE 416 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
415
Types of Creature
Our treasure tables are divided into Humanoid, 
Monster and ‘Other’. Humanoid means not just 
humans, dwarves and elves but also goblins, orcs, 
ogres and so on. Monsters are beasts and other 
creatures that are alive but not civilised (and 
therefore do not treat valuable items the same way as 
humanoids) such as lions, crabs, eagles, dragons or 
wolves. ‘Other’ covers entities such as demons, the 
undead, constructs, summoned beasts and so on. Not 
only are such entities generally less interested in 
treasure, having very different perceptions of status 
and value, they may not even ‘live’ on the same plane 
of existence most of the time!
Clearly, there is a lot of room for interpretation. A 
vampire is technically ‘Other’, being undead, but 
they are probably best treated as a rich humanoid. A 
Lord that has escaped from a dungeon might be 
technically ‘rich’ but if you encounter them as they 
are running across a moor in rags, they won’t have 
much treasure to hand!
Before you make your rolls, try to come up with an 
honest assessment of the creatures ‘worth’.
Pillaging & Skinning
Many a penny was made by scavenging the 
ba8lefield for pieces of armour and weapons with a 
decent sale value, and small fortunes have been made 
by skinning creatures and selling their furs, pelts and 
hides.
For many humanoids a description is given of their 
significant equipment and this can be taken and sold 
later on. If no description is provided, you’ll have to 
try and work out from their combat values what sort 
of gear they are using. If unsure, just equip them with 
a hand weapon such as a mace and simple armour 
such as a leather cuirass or hauberk. If you do take 
equipment from your defeated foes remember that 
you have a limited number of encumbrance slots and 
a few swords will quickly fill them up. You cannot 
stagger out of a dungeon with a hundred goblin short 
swords on your back!
As a rough guide to what arms and armour a 
humanoid may have you can use these rules:
• Poor creatures (SKILL 1-6) could have simple 
weapons such as clubs, daggers, short swords, 
spears and basic armour such as a leather cuirass 
or hauberk or a small shield.
• Average creatures (SKILL 7-9) could have 
common martial weapons such as long swords, 
morning stars, maces and chainmail armour or 
medium shields.
• Rich creatures (SKILL 10+) could have unusual 
weapons such as two-handed swords or a 
ba8leaxe and they may have the highest quality 
(breastplate or plate mail) armour.
Humanoids will also have clothing (though in the 
case of orcs, goblins and so on it will be dirty and 
ragged), a pouch or backpack, a waterskin and at 
least one meal’s worth of food. In the case of ‘evil’ 
humanoids, the food may be ro8en or poisonous - if 
you eat it roll 1d6. On a 1-3 it is foul and makes you 
sick, causing 1 point of STAMINA damage. On a 4-6 
it is normal food.
For beasts you will have to assess, honestly, from 
their description if they have a hide or pelt that is 
valuable. As a general rule you should assume that 
they have li8le value. So the pelt of a wild dog would 
not be a valuable commodity, but that of a lion or 
tiger would be worth taking. Rare creatures will be 
more valuable than common ones and strange or 
magical creatures will be more valuable than their 
mundane brethren. If you feel undecided, have your 
hero make an Animal Lore skill test - if they succeed 
they have remembered which part of their foe can be 
extracted for gold.


--- PAGE 417 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
416
To obtain the skin (or teeth, or horns) you should 
make a Hunting or Crafting (Leatherworking) skill 
roll to get it off in a decent condition. If you fail, it is 
ruined and worthless. If you succeed, you obtain a 
pelt that is worth 1d6gp x SKILL of the creature you 
have killed. If the creature was magical in nature (e.g. 
a basilisk) you can double the value of the hide. Hides 
occupy one encumbrance slot, or two if the creature 
was particularly large.
Clearly, this is a very simplified system and you are 
invited to consider the question in more detail if you 
intend to make a living out of the fur trade!
Treasure Locations
Most heroes would appreciate it if their foes could all 
carry around a large bag containing all their loot, but 
sadly this isn’t particularly likely. The Director 
should consider where a creature might keep its 
treasure and how easy it might be for the hero to find 
it, asking themselves questions such as: Does the 
creature usually carry items? If they do, how many? 
Does the creature have a home or lair? Have the 
heroes encountered it where it lives or somewhere 
else? Does this creature care about wealth or are coins 
and valuables just shiny pebbles to it?
More detailed answers can be sought, particularly by 
referring to the AFF Encyclopedia Arcana vol I which 
has detailed rules to describe where treasure can be 
found. In the interests of brevity and simplicity, we 
suggest two possible locations.
Treasure is carried: This applies to humanoids, undead 
that still carry the trappings of life (so a ghoul might 
still carry a pouch of coins, but a ghost probably 
doesn’t) and any other foes that the Director feels 
might hold or carry items, based on their description. 
They will have with them up to 100 coins, any small 
or portable valuables (rings, gems etc) and any 
magical items or consumables that they can use 
effectively (if they have a magic sword for example 
they may wish to use it whilst fighting for their life). 
If they are intelligent it should be assumed that they 
will try to use such items when they are threatened or 
a8acked, including consumables. The sight of an orc 
warlord drinking a potion of STAMINA mid-fight is 
dispiriting, but why wouldn’t they use it?
Treasure is in their home or lair: non-humanoids or 
those with no particular interest in the wealth they 
have accumulated will have it somewhere around 
their lair or home. In the case of beasts or any 
unintelligent creatures it might simply be sca8ered 
near the corpses of their victims. For other foes, such 
as demons or intelligent planar entities (genies, some 
elementals) they may at least recognise the 
importance of treasure and hide it or use it to lure 
heroes to their doom. Finding the lair or home: If the 
creature is encountered in a dungeon, it should be 
assumed that they are living in their lair or home and 
you don’t have to search for it. If they are met in a 
se8lement or the wilderness, it will be more difficult 
or impossible to find their abode. In those cases the 
Director may allow a Hunting, Awareness or City 
Lore skill test to track down the location, though 
there should be penalties applied to reflect the 
difficulty of finding a highly specific place with few 
clues - a minimum penalty of -3 would be 
appropriate under even the best circumstances.
For humanoids, most of whom value their treasures, 
coins and items will be stored with care, possibly 
concealed or guarded with traps.  A Director can 
either make a decision about the location of any 
treasures or you may roll to see where it is and then 
decide if that is appropriate for the monster.
Humanoid  
 
          Monsters  
 
 
Other
2d6 
 
2-4 
     5-9         10-12 
 2-3 
    4-10  
11-12       2-3           4-9 
     10-12
Location 
Hidden    Stored     Trapped  Hidden   Sca8ered 
Hidden     Hidden    Sca8ered     Trapped


--- PAGE 418 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
417
Hidden: The treasure has been carefully hidden (or 
accidentally concealed) somewhere in the home or 
lair. You will need to succeed with an Awareness skill 
test with a -3 penalty to find it. If you fail, it is lost to 
you.
Stored: The treasure has been placed in a container, 
but not carefully hidden. You will need to succeed 
with an Awareness skill test to find it. If you fail, it is 
lost to you.
Trapped: The treasure has been protected with a 
devious trap - roll on the Table 4.4.2 Traps. Once you 
have disarmed or triggered the trap, you may take 
the loot.
Sca3ered: The treasure is sca8ered around the home / 
lair of your foe. If you wish to take it, you must spend 
a short time (a few minutes) gathering it up.
Using Bargain & Evaluate
Apart from coins, which the heroes can use directly, 
they will need to assess the value of an item and find 
somewhere to sell it. The two skills that are most 
useful are Evaluate and Bargain.
Bargain: Some encounters and locations allow you to 
buy or sell goods and services. Unless the description 
says otherwise, you can a8empt to make a Bargain 
skill roll to alter the price. Rules for using this skill 
and a list of common modifiers are provided in 
Chapter 2 of the AFF Core Rulebook.
The Bargain skill roll is a contested skill roll - if no 
value is given for traders skill, assume they have 
Bargain skill of 7. A successful Bargain test reduces 
the price by 25% (or 50% with a critical success), a 
failed roll increases it by 25% (or 50% for a critical 
failure). Prices should be rounded to the nearest gold 
or silver piece.
For example, if your hero is trying to buy a Long 
Sword at the Weaponsmith (M14). The normal price 
in a city is 30gp (as listed in the Advanced Fighting 
Fantasy rulebook).With a successful skill check, done 
as a contested skill test against the weaponsmith, that 
price can be reduced to 22gp, but if you fail the roll 
the price increases to 38gp. Remember to apply the 
modifiers for Social Rank (chapter 7) and other 
modifiers as described in the core rulebook.
For selling items the same rules apply, except that a 
success in the skill test means you increase the 
amount of gold you receive and a failed test reduces 
the amount received.
Evaluate: Evaluate is used to assess the value of an 
item such as a piece of jewellery or a bundle of furs. 
This is helpful in deciding if you want to pick up and 
carry an item that will occupy an encumbrance slot, 
or if you should leave it behind. If a8empting to 
identify the worth of a magical item (not the qualities, 
just the value in gold) a hero can only use Evaluate if 
they have points in the special skill Magical Lore.
When a hero finds ‘Valuables’ a successful Evaluate 
skill test increase their worth in gold by 10% (the hero 
identifies a particular marking or quality of the item 
that can be used to talk up the price to a merchant, 
such as the signature of a famous artist on a painting, 
or the fact that a gem is of a particularly unusual 
colour or cut).
A failed Evaluate test means that the hero must take 
a -3 penalty to their Bargain skill roll when they sell 
an item - they are simply unsure of its worth and may 
well end up selling it for far less than they could get.


--- PAGE 419 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
418
Treasure & Encumbrance
It can be tempting to pick up everything that is found 
and haul it all back to the market for a large reward. 
AFF uses an abstract system to show when a hero is 
carrying too much. A hero may carry 10 normal sized 
items plus an extra 1 for each point in the Strength 
skill. The total does not include worn armour, 
clothing or a backpack.  Larger items count as two or 
more items and small items such as arrows count as 
one when a bundle or stack of them are carried (in a 
quiver or pouch for example). One hundred very 
small items - such as coins - count as one item.
A hero carrying more than their limit is encumbered; 
they move at half pace and will suffer penalties to 
skill tests including combat. A hero cannot carry 
more than double their normal allowance.
Pack animals such as mules or horses have 20 
encumbrance slots, provided they are equipped with 
saddlebags and the like in which to store items. Very 
large animals will have more -  they should be able to 
load it up with 60 encumbrance slots worth of items. 
Of course, they must remember to feed and water 
their animals if they want them to survive the trip.
Treasure Tables
 The tables are divided into ‘A - Everyday Items’, ‘B-
Coins’, ‘C-Valuables’, ‘D-Consumables’ and ‘E, F & G 
- Magic Items’. Tables B, C & D are also divided into 
different categories based on how much wealth a 
creature could have, so table C has four columns - 
Keepsake, Stash, Plunder, Hoard which increase in 
likely value though as usual, the dice decide.
2d6 
13.2 Treasure Table A - Everyday Items, as could be carried by most humanoids
2 
Comfortable Bedroll - this is a particularly well made and comfortable bedroll that is, amazingly, free 
from lice and bugs. Gain +1 to your Awareness skill for waking from sleep if using it. Worth 5sp.
3 
A bundle of swatches - you find 2d6 small pieces of colourful cloth made from a variety of textiles, which 
might be useful as rags or perhaps you can sew them onto your clothes for decoration.
4 
Cutlery - various brass knives, forks and spoons, all in good condition and stamped with the mark of a 
leaping fox. Gain +1 on your Crafting: Cooking if you keep these. Worth 7sp, (one inventory slot).
5 
A cloth cap - worn, but still serviceable, this cap will keep your head dry, but doesn’t do much else (2sp).
6 
Flint & Tinder - a fire makers kit, in a neat wooden box with a flame engraved on the top. If you keep it, 
gain +1 on any test needed to start a fire. Worth 2sp, has 20 uses.
7 
Warm Socks - a particularly nice pair of woollen socks, unworn and still tied up in a bit of string. Wearing 
them grants you...comfortable feet.
8 
Bundle of string & hooks - you find a neatly wrapped bundle of string, probably 20’ or so fully unwound, 
with a couple of fishing hooks tucked into it. It’s small enough to be kept without occupying a slot of 
your inventory and will allow you to fish, if you get the chance. Worth 1sp, has 10 uses.
9 
 A wig - this is a wig, made of horsehair, that could be kept and used as part of a disguise. Seems to have 
a few fleas though...gain +1 to your Disguise skill when you use it. One use only before the itchiness 
forces you to throw it away. You can sell it for 7sp.
10 
A well made cape- this is a particularly thick and well upholstered cape. If you are wearing it in 
particularly cold or wet weather add a +2 bonus to any exposure rolls. Worth 2gp.
11 
Underclothes - warm and stylish, these underclothes make you feel like a new person. They are almost  
immune to the usual lice and very easy to clean. You can sell them for 2sp.
12 
Boots - a pair of exceptionally well made leather boots that happen to fit you. These boots have an 
excellent tread and grant you +1 bonus to your Acrobatics and Climb skill tests in unusual terrain, such 
as a slippery Catacomb. Otherwise, they are simply very comfortable. Worth 8sp.


--- PAGE 420 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
419
Coins
Carrying wealth in the form of coins is not universal 
- some primitive societies rely on barter or some other 
means of exchange - but in most places humanoids 
will keep some coins on their person. Across Titan 
there are many different ‘mints’ producing different 
types of coin but for the sake of simplicity everything 
is assumed to be in the form of gold and silver coins 
that will be accepted by any merchants you trade 
with. As with the standard rules, 10 silver pieces are 
equivalent to one gold piece.
You can introduce other coins (copper or bronze 
pieces being worth less than silver, platinum pieces 
being worth more than gold) should you wish to, but 
note that throughout the Advanced Fighting Fantasy 
source books prices are given in silver and gold so 
you will need to create your own exchange rates.
13.3 Treasure Table B - Coins (up to 100 coins will be carried, any remainder will be in the home / lair of the 
creature as described in the ‘treasure locations’ section). 
2d6 
B1.  
 
B2. 
 
B3. 
 
B4. 
 
B5. 
 
B6.
Destitute 
Poor 
 
Moderate 
Prosperous 
Wealthy 
Opulent
2 
½ sp 
 
3 sp 
 
½ gp 
 
3 gp 
 
10 gp  
50 gp
3 
1 sp 
 
6 sp 
 
1 gp 
 
6 gp 
 
15 gp  
100 gp
4 
3 sp 
 
9 sp 
 
3 gp 
 
9 gp 
 
20 gp  
120 gp
5 
4 sp 
 
12 sp  
4 gp 
 
12 gp  
25 gp  
140 gp
6 
5 sp 
 
12+1d6 sp 
5 gp 
 
12+1d6 gp 
30 gp  
1170 gp
7 
1d6+3 sp 
15+1d6 sp 
1d6+3 gp 
15+1d6 gp 
40 gp  
200 gp
8 
1d6+4 sp 
18+1d6 sp 
1d6+4 gp 
18+1d6 gp 
50 gp  
250 gp
9 
1d6+5 sp 
21+1d6 sp 
1d6+5 gp 
21+1d6 gp 
70 gp  
300 gp
10 
1d6+6 sp 
21+2d6 sp 
1d6+6 gp 
21+2d6 gp 
100 gp  
400 gp
11 
2d6+3 sp 
21+3d6 sp 
2d6+3 gp 
21+3d6 gp 
150 gp  
500 gp
12 
Roll on  
Roll on 
Roll on 
Roll on  
Roll on 
Roll twice on
next column next column next column next column next column this column
For those that wish to use average or fixed values ‘Destitute’ is worth 7sp, ‘Poor’ is worth 18sp, ‘Moderate’ is worth 6gp, 
‘Prosperous’ is worth 18gp, ‘Wealthy’ is worth 50gp and ‘Opulent’ is worth 230gp.


--- PAGE 421 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
420
Valuables
A lot of people like to keep their wealth in the form of 
valuable objects, such as gems, jewellery or crafted 
items such as artworks. Small pieces may be carried 
by humanoids or on undead that were once human, 
but other pieces will be in the home or lair of the 
creature. Remember that a hero will need to take a 
test of their Evaluate skill to realise that the item is 
valuable, otherwise they might overlook it as just 
another piece of junk.
13.4 Treasure Table C - Valuables
2d6 
C1. Keepsake 
 
C2. Stash 
 
C3. Plunder 
 
C4. Hoard
2 
A small piece of  
A fine glass goblet 
A set of gold teeth 
A large but flawed
onyx worth 1gp. 
worth 5gp 
 
worth 10gp 
 
Jasper, worth 30gp
3 
A carved bone ring  
A silver ring  
A golden ring  
A golden torc of simple 
worth 3gp 
 
worth 15gp 
 
worth 25gp 
 
design worth 60gp
4 
Furs worth 6gp 
Furs worth 25gp 
A Fur lined cape  
Bolts of Silk Cloth
worth 50gp 
 
worth 100gp
5 
Garnet Toe-ring  
Silver Ingots  
Gold ingots 
 
Rare Books and
worth 8gp 
 
worth 35gp 
 
worth 75gp 
 
Maps worth 150gp
6 
Carnelian Brooch  
Coral Figurine  
Silver Bracelet set  
Jade Tiger 
worth 11gp 
 
worth 45gp 
 
with Turquoise, 
worth 200gp
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
worth 100gp  
7 
A Citrine  
 
Jet encrusted silk 
A jewelled scabbard An enamelled silver
worth 15gp 
 
glove worth 60gp 
worth 140gp  
and gold box worth 300gp
8 
3 Spinels worth  
A finely carved holy A bag of mixed 
A portrait of a
15gp in total  
symbol, worth 100gp gems worth 180gp  
great hero,  worth 400gp
9 
Bronze face mask,  
A pair of silver 
Silver and Sapphire 
A finely carved ebony
worth 20gp 
 
candlesticks   
necklace, worth  
face-mask, worth 600gp
worth 140gp  
250gp  
 
10 
Knife with topaz  
3 simple platinum  
A cluster of gems 
A gold and silver
set in hilt  
 
rings worth 180gp 
set in platinum 
crown, jewelled,
worth 25gp 
 
in total  
 
worth 375gp  
worth 750gp
11 
Amber Pendant  
An assortment of 
A large Ruby,  
A large diamond
worth 35gp 
 
Emeralds worth  
worth 500gp  
worth 1,000gp
200gp  
 
12 
Roll on next column Roll on next column Roll on next column Roll twice on this column
For those that wish to use average or fixed values ‘Keepsake’ is worth 15gp, ‘Stash’ is worth 85gp, ‘Plunder’ is worth 175gp 
and ‘Hoard’ is worth 375gp.


--- PAGE 422 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
421
Consumable Items
These items are useful (and therefore have value) but 
also have a limited number of charges or uses. The 
sale value of the items is given with the description.
As per the usual Advanced Fighting Fantasy rules, 
using a scroll or a wand requires that the hero has at 
least one point in the ‘Magic Lore’ special skill, but no 
skill test is required to use the item. A scroll will be 
consumed on use, a wand will lose one charge (when 
it reaches zero it will become a non-magical stick). 
Some magic users may be able to learn spells from 
scrolls; this also consumes the scroll.
Potions generally have one use and the whole potion 
must be consumed to gain the effect; they cannot be 
shared!
2d6
13.5 Treasure Table D - Consumable Items
D1. Sundries 
 
 
 
D2. Alchemist’s Stash  
 
D3. Wizards Bag 
2 
1 Ration of ships biscuit;  
 
1 Ration of cheese &  
 
1 Ration of cured ham &
with weevils a’plenty. 1gp 
 
a keg of beer. 3gp 
 
 
a bo8le of fine wine. 10gp
3 
Healing potion, restores  
 
Cleansing potion, cures 
 
A selection of cheeses (2 
1d6 STAMINA 
 
 
any disease or poison. 
 
rations) and 2 bo8les of wine.
4 
Scroll of Darksee 
 
 
Scroll of Sleep or Sorcery  
 
Scroll of Magic Bridge
components worth 50g 
 
Vial of poison, 6+1d6 doses*
5 
Vial of poison, one dose* remaining Wand of Force Bolts (as the spell), 
1d6 charges.
6 
Scroll of Levitate or 6 silver arrows Scroll of Gills  
 
 
Scroll of Cockroach or 
Sorcery components 
worth 100g
7 
Wand of Fire Bolts (as the spell),  
3 Dwarven ‘Cakes’, restore 
 
3+1d6 Elven breads, each
1d6 charges. 
 
 
 
5 points of STAMINA each 
 
restores 5 points of 
   
 
 
 
 
 
when eaten. 
 
 
 
STAMINA when eaten
8 
Vial of poison, two  
 
 
Vial of poison,  
 
 
Wand of Lightning Bolt
doses* remaining 
 
 
2+1d6 doses*  
 
 
(as the spell) 1d6 charges.
9 
1d6 - 1-3: Scroll of See Through,  
1d6 - 1-3: Potion of STAMINA, 
Potion of SKILL and 
4-6: Sorcery components (25gp) 
4-6: 12 silver arrows  
 
a potion of STAMINA
10 
Potion of STAMINA  
 
Potion of SKILL 
 
 
Potion of LUCK and a potion 
of STAMINA
11 
Potion of SKILL 
 
 
Potion of LUCK 
 
 
One potion each of LUCK, 
SKILL and STAMINA
12 
Roll on next column  
 
Roll on next column  
 
Roll twice on this column
*Poisons are a contact poison, Desert Scorpion blade-paste, which can be applied to a weapon and inflicts 1d6 points of 
additional damage when that weapon hits (after one use it is worn off). Using poison requires a successful test of the Trap 
Knowledge special skill - failing the skill test means the poison is wasted (fumbling the test means the hero poisons 
themselves).


--- PAGE 423 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
422
AFF contains many potions, ointments, foodstuffs 
and spells which can be combined to produce some 
type of consumable treasure. As with the other 
treasure tables you should investigate other sources 
to discover items you could find. 
Magic Items
Clearly, the number of possible magical items and 
qualities are huge and it is also important to consider 
the effect of a hero receiving a powerful item. A 
sword that grants a bonus to SKILL, for example, 
provides a huge boost to the fortunes of its wielder.
For the purposes of this book we have provided the 
means to generate magical weapons and armour only 
as these are generally considered to be the most 
common and relevant type of magical item, but this 
should not be your limitation. There are a huge 
number of magical and mysterious items sca8ered 
throughout the AFF source books and it is strongly 
suggested that you make use of them as well as 
referring to the villains in chapter 9, each of which 
has their own unique magical treasure.
Use Table E to find out what type of magic item you 
have found and then Table F for magic weapons or 
Table G for magic armour to discover how potent it is. 
For example, a roll of 9 on Table E indicates a shield, 
a further roll of 4 means this is a large shield. Looking 
at Table G we roll a 4 followed by an 8, indicating that 
this Large Shield causes opponents to suffer a -2 
penalty to their damage rolls. A potent item indeed!
Identifying Magical Items
Recognising a magical item requires either the 
A8uned talent or the Magical Lore special skill, but 
neither of these will give you the precise nature of the 
item, just a rough description. A sword that adds +1 
to the damage roll would be described as being 
‘unnaturally sharp’. The hero can then discover the 
exact mechanical details by using the item. A fuller 
explanation of how magical items are identified is 
given in Chapter 10 of the AFF rulebook. 
If the Director decides, magic items can be obviously 
magical. They may glow or sparkle, be covered in 
glowing runes or even emit a strange, alluring, 
melody when touched. This does not mean a hero 
will automatically understand what the item does, 
just that it is magical.
Cursed Weapons & Armour
Sadly, some evil powers and magic users enjoy 
making cursed items and leaving them where heroes 
can find them. Identifying and then ridding oneself of 
a cursed item is difficult, you cannot simply take it off 
and throw it away!
Initially a cursed item will appear to be a normal, 
beneficial, magic item and you should make another 
roll on treasure table F to find out what it seems to be 
- the curse will be the opposite of the beneficial effect. 
The curse only becomes apparent once you have 
equipped the item - put on a piece of armour or used 
the weapon - at which point the hero should realise 
there is something wrong. For example, Gruder finds 
a spear covered in glowing fiery runes which, in his 
haste, he picks up and uses at the first opportunity 
trying to find out what it does. Secretly the Director 
makes another roll ge8ing the result of ‘+1 Damage 
Roll’, which they reverse to be ‘-1 Damage Roll’. 
After Gruder first uses the spear, he realises 
something is wrong (though not exactly what - it’s 
just that the spear didn’t do as much damage as he 
expected) and wants to get rid of it. He resolves to 
hurl it into a river the next chance he gets. 
Unfortunately, even though he does throw itaway the 
next time he gets into a fight he discovers that the 
spear is once again in his hand!
You can be as inventive with curses as you can with 
beneficial magical items (how about a cursed sword 
that has a 1 in 6 chance each round of becoming 
ethereal and unable to hurt anyone?), if you want to 
simply reverse the usual effects then do the 
following.


--- PAGE 424 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
423
Beneficial Effects 
 
 
 
 
 
Curse Effects
-1 to opponents Armour or Dodge roll 
 
 
+1 to opponents Armour or Dodge roll
+1 Damage Roll 
 
 
 
 
 
-1 Damage Roll
+1 to Combat Roll 
 
 
 
 
 
-1 to Combat Roll
Flaming: +1 fire damage when it hits  
 
 
Burning: When the hero inflicts damage with this 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weapon they also suffer 1 point of fire damage.
Rime: +1 cold damage when it hits 
 
 
 
Freezing: When the hero inflicts damage with this 
weapon they also suffer 1 point of cold damage.
+1 SKILL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-1 SKILL
Reliable: Minimum damage roll is 2  
 
 
Unwieldy: Maximum damage roll is 5
Movement skill penalties are 25% less than usual 
 
Movement skill penalties are 25% more than usual
-1 to opponents damage roll  
 
 
 
+1 to opponents damage roll
+1 Armour roll 
 
 
 
 
 
-1 Armour roll
Reliable: Minimum armour roll is 2  
 
 
Flawed: Maximum armour roll is 5
Always prevents at least one point of damage.  
 
Always suffer at least one point of damage when 
struck. 
Resistance: 1 in 6 chance of resisting magic  
 
Susceptible: Damage from magic increased by 1.
+2 STAMINA  
 
 
 
 
 
-2 STAMINA
Halves damage from fire 
 
 
 
 
Doubles damage from fire
Ridding yourself of a cursed item can be done by 
visiting a temple of Sindla, Asrel, Fourga, Hamaskis, 
Filash, Fulkra or Logaan and requesting that a priest 
use the ‘Bless’ power on the hero - this will allow 
them to set the cursed item aside (though it does not 
destroy it). 
This service typically requires a donation of 6d6gp. 
An alternative is to find a powerful sorcerer who is 
willing to cast the spell ZED to break the connection, 
though this is likely to be a very expensive request.
The Director may wish to come up with other means 
of pu8ing aside cursed items, though none of them 
should be easy. Finding cursed items is a rare 
occurrence and they should be hard to dispose of - 
after all, they were made to cause misery and 
suffering!


--- PAGE 425 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
424
13.6 Treasure Table E - Magic Weapons & Armour. First roll to find out what type of item has been found or 
choose one that is appropriate for the hero.
2d6  
Item Found (roll 1d6 to find out exactly what is found)
2 
Thrown - 
1-3:  
Throwing Dagger
4-5:  
Javelin
6:  
Sling
3 
Polearms - 
1-4:  
Polearm
5-6:  
Spear
4 
Bows - 
1-3:  
Longbow
4-5:  
Shortbow
6:  
Crossbow
5 
Axes - 
1-3:  
Ba8le Axe
4-6:  
Hand Axe
6 
Swords - 
1:  
Dagger
2:  
Greatsword
3-4:  
Shortsword
5-6:  
Sword
7 
Armour - 
1:  
Leather Cuirass
2:  
Leather Hauberk
3:  
Chain Cuirass
4: 
Chain Hauberk
5:  
Breastplate
6: 
Plate Armour
8 
Clubs - 
1:  
Club
2-3:  
Mace
4:  
Morning Star
5-6:  
Warhammer
9 
Shield - 
1-3:  
Small Shield
4-5:  
Large Shield
10 
Staves - Quarterstaff
11 
Robes - Enchanted Clothing (Armour that is cloth)
12 
Roll Twice, each is a separate item


--- PAGE 426 ---

Chapter 13 -Treasure
425
After you have discovered what sort of item you have 
found, roll on either Table F (Weapons) or Table G 
(Armour) to find out how potent it is.
13.7 Treasure Table F - Magic Weapons. Roll to see how powerful the item is and what effect it has.
 
F1 Magical - 10x base cost 
F2 Enchanted - 20x base cost 
 
F3 Dazzling - 50x base cost
2d6 
2-7 
 
 
 
8-10 
 
 
 
 
11-12
2 
Cursed! 
 
 
Cursed! 
 
 
 
Cursed!
3 
-1 to opponents Armour  
-2 to opponents Armour 
 
-3 to opponents Armour
or Dodge roll  
 
or Dodge roll  
 
 
or Dodge roll
4-5 
+1 Damage Roll 
 
+2 Damage Roll 
 
 
+3 Damage Roll
6-7 
+1 to Combat Roll 
 
+2 to Combat Roll 
 
 
+3 to Combat Roll
8-9 
Flaming: +1 fire damage  
Flaming: +2 fire damage 
 
Flaming: +1d6 fire damage
when it hits 
 
 
when it hits 
 
 
 
when it hits
10 
Rime: +1 cold damage  
Rime: +2 cold damage 
 
Rime: +1d6 cold damage
when it hits 
 
 
when it hits 
 
 
 
when it hits
11 
+1 SKILL 
 
 
+1 SKILL & +1 to Damage Roll 
+2 SKILL
12 
Reliable: Minimum   
Reliable: Minimum 
 
 
Roll twice on this column
damage roll is 2 
 
damage roll is 3 
 
 
13.8 Treasure Table G - Magic Armour. Roll to see how powerful the item is and what effect it has.
 
F1 Magical - 10x base cost 
F2 Enchanted - 20x base cost 
 
F3 Dazzling - 50x base cost
2d6 
2-7 
 
 
 
8-10 
 
 
 
 
11-12
2 
Cursed! 
 
 
Cursed! 
 
 
 
Cursed!
3 
Movement skill penalties  
Movement skill penalties are  
Movement skill penalties are
are 25% less than usual 
50% less than usual 
 
 
75% less than usual
4 
-1 to opponents damage roll -2 to opponents damage roll  
-3 to opponents damage roll
5-6 
+1 Armour roll 
 
+2 Armour roll 
 
 
+3 Armour roll
7-8 
Reliable: Minimum   
Reliable: Minimum   
 
Reliable: Minimum
armour roll is 2 
 
armour roll is 3 
 
 
armour roll is 4
9 
Always prevents at least  
Always prevents at least  
 
Always prevents at least
one point of damage.   
two points of damage. 
 
three points of damage.
10 
Resistance: 1 in 6 chance  
Resistance: 2 in 6 chance 
 
Resistance: 3 in 6 chance
of resisting magic 
 
of resisting magic 
 
 
of resisting magic
11 
+2 STAMINA  
 
+4 STAMINA  
 
 
+6 STAMINA
12 
Halves damage from fire 
Halves damage from fire & cold 
Roll twice on this column


--- PAGE 427 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
426
Of course, there are many other magical effects that 
you could add to weapons and armour, should you 
wish to include specific items. You should consider 
their impact on your heroes adventures as some of 
the abilities are very strong, particularly anything 
that increases your SKILL or combat roll.
For more ideas, look in the Fighting Fantasy 
gamebooks and the other Advanced Fighting Fantasy 
rulebooks. You could include effects such as:
• Weapon has a chosen foe, against which it has 
increased bonuses or effects.
• Item has some intelligence and personality and 
can talk to the hero.
• Item has the ability to cast spells a certain 
number of times each day.
• Item is famous and strikes fear or awe into those 
that see it.
• Item is ‘bound’ to the hero and even if they are 
parted it will somehow return to them.
• Item gives a bonus to the use of a specific skill or 
a group of skills e.g. ‘The Staff of Lores fills the 
mind with knowledge, granting +2 to any Lore 
skill test’. 
Working out the gameplay effects of such powers 
should be done with care and the solution will 
depend on your campaign and se8ing. Heroes may 
want to own powerful magical items but the 
downside is that this can make it difficult to provide 
them with a challenge.
Summary
The finding of treasure, particularly magical treasure, 
is a key part of an heroic fantasy game and heroes 
should expect some rewards for their bravery. The 
amount of treasure a hero receives can vary 
enormously and the Director should have a rough 
idea of how much wealth and power they want to 
supply, as this will have a strong effect on how the 
game progresses. The ideas in this chapter should 
give you a broad enough range of options to choose 
from and as always you should modify or add to 
them as you see fit.


--- PAGE 428 ---

Appendices
427
APPENDIX I - LIST OF TABLES
P16, 90, 119,  Table 3.1.1 Standard Encounter Options - see descriptions in Chapter 3 for more details
171, 201
p24 
 
Table 3.1.2 Description of Monster Behaviour
p25 
 
Table 3.1.3  Mark of Death
p28 
 
Table 3.1.4 - Random Wilderness Area finder
p30 
 
Table 3.2.1 Encounter Adjustment by Hero Grade
p31 
 
Table 3.2.2 Simple Monster Templates - for more extensive rules see the AFF Combat Companion
p48 
 
Table 4.1.1 Se8lement Origins
p49 
 
Table 4.1.2 Reason for Se8lement Placement
p50 
 
Table 4.1.3 Current Occupation
p51 
 
Table 4.1.4 Map Creation Summary using the ‘dice drop’ method
p52 
 
Table 4.1.5 List of Se8lement Locations
p57 
 
Table 4.1.6 Rough Sleeping Encounters
p59 
 
Table 4.1.7 Temple (TE) Location Encounters. 
p60 
 
Table 4.1.8 Garbage Heap (GH) Location Encounters.
p61 
 
Table 4.1.9 Slum Alleys (SA) Location Encounters.
p62 
 
Table 4.1.10 Wealthy Streets (WS) Location Encounters.
p63 
 
Table 4.1.11 Streets (ST) Location Encounters.
p64 
 
Table 4.1.12 Jail (JA) Location Encounters.
p65 
 
Table 4.1.13 Inn (IN) Location Encounters.
p66 
 
Table 4.1.14 Tavern (TA) Location Encounters.
p67 
 
Table 4.1.15 Drinking Den (DD) Location Encounters.
p68 
 
Table 4.1.16 Graveyard (GY) Location Encounters.
p69 
 
Table 4.1.17 Docks or Customs House (DO)  Location Encounters.
p70 
 
Table 4.1.18 College (CO) Location Encounters.
p72 
 
Table 4.1.19 Hospital (HO) Location Encounters.
p73 
 
Table 4.1.20 Marketplace (MP) Location Encounters.
p74 
 
Table 4.1.21 City Gate (CG)  Location Encounters.
p76 
 
Table 4.1.22 Park (PA) Location Encounters.
p77 
 
Table 4.1.23 Keep (KE) Location Encounters.
p79 
 
Table 4.1.24 Theatre (TH) Location Encounters.
p81 
 
Table 4.1.25  Catacomb Origin.
p82 
 
Table 4.1.26  Catacomb Condition
p82 
 
Table 4.1.27  Creature Conditions.
p83 
 
Table 4.1.28 Catacomb Encounters. 
p84 
 
Table 4.1.29 Street Factors
p86 
 
Table 4.1.30 Lawbreaker Table


--- PAGE 429 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
428
p89 
 
Table 4.2.1 Se8lement Social Encounters
p115 
 
Table 4.2.2 Townsfolk - roll on this table then refer to the encounter
p118 
 
Table 4.3.1 Se8lement Challenge Encounters
p124 
 
Table 4.3.2 Diseases
p135 
 
Table 4.4.1 Se8lement Map Encounters
p146, 182 
Table 4.4.2 Traps
p155 
 
Table 4.5.1 Se8lement Details and Description
p156 
 
Table 4.5.2 City of Ludria Location Details
p160 
 
Table 4.5.3 Se8lement Summary Description - Concise Version
p162 
 
Table 5.1 Dungeon Origin
p165 
 
Table 5.2  Dungeon Condition
p166 
 
Table 5.3  Creature Condition
p169 
 
Table 5.4 Room Contents
P170, 388 
Table 5.5 Encounter Difficulty: Dungeon Encounter by Hero Grade
p172 
 
Table 5.6 Random Monster Encounters
p174 
 
Table 5.7 Dungeon Denizens
p179 
 
Table 5.8 Room Entrance Features
p180 
 
Table 5.9 Room Condition
p181 
 
Table 5.10 Room Features
p185 
 
Table 5.11 Transition Rooms
p197 
 
Table 6.1.1 Random Wilderness Generator
P197, 391 
Table 6.1.2 Random Wilderness Area finder
p202 
 
Table 6.1.3 Hunting & Foraging
p205 
 
Table 6.2.1 Plains Encounter Table
p206 
 
Table 6.2.2 Forest Encounter Table
p207 
 
Table 6.2.3 Hills Encounter Table
p208 
 
Table 6.2.4 Mountains Encounter Table
p210 
 
Table 6.2.5 Tundra & Ice Encounter Table
p211 
 
Table 6.2.6 Desert Encounter Table
p212 
 
Table 6.2.7 Jungle Encounter Table
p213 
 
Table 6.2.8 Marsh & Swamp Encounter Table
p214 
 
Table 6.2.9 Rivers & Lakes Encounter Table
p215 
 
Table 6.2.10 Shoreline & Sea Encounter Table
p216 
 
Table 6.3.1 Wilderness Encounters
P223, 389 
Table 6.3.2 Random Monster Generator


--- PAGE 430 ---

Appendices
429
p240 
 
Table 7.1.1 Political System
p241 
 
Table 7.1.2 Religious Inclination of the Se8lement or Region
p242 
 
Table 7.1.3 List of the Gods
p244 
 
Table 7.2.1 Social Ranks
p262 
 
Table 7.4.1 Birth Month & Effect
p264 
 
Table 7.4.2 Unusual Life Experience
p266 
 
Table 7.4.3 Sworn Enemy
p267 
 
Table 7.4.4 Personality Quirk
p269 
 
Table 8.1 Rumours & Events
p270 
 
Table 8.2 Winds of Magic Rumours & Events
p271 
 
Table 8.3 Fury of the Gods Rumours & Events
p272 
 
Table 8.4 Chaos Unleashed Rumours & Events
p273 
 
Table 8.5 Lust for Power - Rumours & Events
p274 
 
Table 8.6 Natural World - Rumours & Events
p276 
 
Table 8.7 Trivia & Gossip - Rumours & Events
p278 
 
Table 9.1.1 Who is your Opponent?
p285 
 
Table 9.1.2 Curses
p304 
 
Table 9.2.1 Villain Domain
p305 
 
Table 9.2.2 Winds of Magic Motivations
p306 
 
Table 9.2.3 Fury of the Gods Motivations
p307 
 
Table 9.2.4 Chaos Unleashed Motivations
p308 
 
Table 9.2.5 Lust for Power Motivations
p309 
 
Table 9.2.6 Villains Lair
p310 
 
Table 9.2.7 Villain's Henchman
p311 
 
Table 9.2.8 Villain's Retaliation
p312 
 
Table 9.2.9 Villain's Ba8le Tactic
p316 
 
Table 10.1 Starting Events
p317 
 
Table 10.2 Combined Mission & Villain by domain
p320 
 
Table 10.1.1 Campaign Missions
p371 
 
Table 10.2.1 What is Happening - the Quest Hook
p373 
 
Table 10.2.2 Why is it your problem?
p374 
 
Table 10.2.3 Typical mission objectives
p375 
 
Table 10.2.4 Breakdown of missions by difficulty and some broad parameters


--- PAGE 431 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
430
p377 
 
Table 10.2.5 Randomised Task Categories
p378 
 
Table 10.2.6 Randomised Combat Tasks
p379 
 
Table 10.2.7 Randomised Magic Tasks
p379 
 
Table 10.2.8 Randomised Religion Tasks
p380 
 
Table 10.2.9 Randomised Movement Tasks
p381 
 
Table 10.2.10 Randomised Knowledge Tasks
p382 
 
Table 10.2.11 Randomised Diplomacy Tasks
p383 
 
Table 10.2.12 Randomised General Tasks
p384 
 
Table 10.2.13 Randomised Subterfuge Tasks
p386 
 
Table 10.2.14 Randomised Exploration Tasks
p390 
 
Table 10.2.15 Combat Complications
p392 
 
Table 10.2.16 Setbacks
p393 
 
Table 10.2.17 Mission Complications
p394 
 
Table 10.2.18 Random Mission Timers
p400 
 
Table 11.1 Adventurer’s Guild Contracts. If refused, you can check again the next day.
p402 
 
Table 11.2 Adventurer’s Guild Contract Rewards
p408 
 
Table 12.1 Examples of typical experience awards
p409 
 
Table 12.2 Consequences of Success
p410 
 
Table 12.3 Consequences of Failure
p414 
 
Table 13.1 Combined Treasure Table
p418 
 
Table 13.2 Treasure Table A - Everyday Items
p419 
 
Table 13.3 Treasure Table B - Coins
p420 
 
Table 13.4 Treasure Table C - Valuables
p421 
 
Table 13.5 Treasure Table D - Consumable Items
p424 
 
Table 13.6 Treasure Table E - Magic Weapons & Armour
p425 
 
Table 13.7 Treasure Table F - Magic Weapons
p425 
 
Table 13.8 Treasure Table G - Magic Armour


--- PAGE 432 ---

Appendices
431
Se=lements
(CG) 
 
City Gate (Wall)
(CO) 
 
College 
(DD) 
 
Drinking Den 
(DO)  
Docks (or customs house) 
(GH)  
Garbage Heap 
(GY) 
 
Graveyard 
(HO)  
Hospital 
(IN) 
 
Inn 
(JA) 
 
Jail 
(KE) 
 
Keep 
(MP) 
 
Marketplace 
(PA) 
 
Park 
(SA) 
 
Slum Alleys 
(ST) 
 
Streets 
(TA) 
 
Tavern 
(TE) 
 
Temple
(TH) 
 
Theatre 
(WS) 
 
Wealthy Streets 
Wilderness
Desert (De)
Forest (Fo)
Hills (Hi)
Jungle (Ju)
Marsh & Swamp (Ma)
Mountains (Mo)
Plains (Pl)
Rivers & Lakes (Ri)
Shoreline & Sea (Sh)
Tundra & Ice (Tu)
APPENDIX II - LIST OF CODES


--- PAGE 433 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
432
APPENDIX III - SOLO FLOWCHART


--- PAGE 434 ---

Appendices
433
KICKSTARTER BACKERS
Rms 
Darrell Rees 
boardgamebollocks 
Steven Isbell 
Leon Tam 
Andy Scott 
Neil @ SFandFantasy.co.uk 
Derventius Wraith 
Atsushi Shimamoto 
Alton Reed 
Kjeld Froberg 
Wiggy 
Nathan Latty 
Tony Graham 
James Manley-Bird 
Daniel Sundström 
Nic Cook 
Ian Greenfield 
Jam Norman 
David Y 
Lord Kram Nossirah 
Morgan Hazel 
Sam "Bifford" 
colinmnash 
Hellium 
Catherine McClarey 
Rich Spainhour 
redfoxx01@googlemail.com 
David Martin 
Argamae 
Mark Seaborne 
David Morgan 
Y. K. Lee 
Edward Healy 
Francois Letarte 
Stephen Mooney 
Ewan Munro 
Jason Vince A. K. A. Dream 
Walker Spirit 
Jonny Gray 
Mark Peoples 
Shawn Medero 
Stephen Lockwood 
Richard Hanton-Rutherford 
Paul Gegg 
Darren Kessell 
Guy Blatch 
Marc Young 
Stephen Sloan 
Jem Kilty 
Steve Townsend 
Brian "Nitehood" Johnson 
David J. Williams 
Michael Nusbaum 
Michael Daemon Gunn 
Rob Crewe 
John P Hansell 
Duncan Lincoln 
Jim Shevlin 
Ivan Kemenes 
Dalton Calford 
James Turner 
Chad Ries 
Terry Adams 
Kip Corriveau 
Ronan Burke 
John Gardiner 
Bryan Howarth 
Patrick Green 
Dan Robinson 
Kevin Barraclough 
Jeff Lloyd 
Julian Chan 
Lee Abbott 
Mark Stanley 
NerdThing 
Dan Hawkes 
Eddie Boshell 
GEMofPOWER 
C 
Craig "Fellfane" Hindle 
Rob 'Sheriff' Davies 
Rob B 
Reg Langford 
Paul Taylor 
Nick Larocco 
Rueben Larson 
Shane & Yvonne Mclean 
Cullen M. M. Waters 
Takahiro Maeda 
Norikatu Konisi 
Aaron F Stanton 
Thalji 
T. Kurt Bond 
Benjamin Chee 
Scott Creation Rites McManus 
David Christopher Lee 
Doc Daddy 
Dave Polhill 
Phil Duncan 
ron beck 
Tristan Melchiori 
Jason Baldwin 
Osye Eldridge Pritchett III 
J 
kagyu3 
Doug Bolden 
veritanuda 
Darren Bulmer 
Patrick Carrick 
Román Emin 
Allan Bray 
Nick Corbin 
Salina Schjødt Larsen 
Dave Bowen 
Robert Carnel 
Pete Bounous 
Liam Hazlehurst 
Patrick Waldbuesser 
Alberto Martín de Hĳas 
ColinD 
Simon Proctor 
Shaun Bennett 
Patrick Limacher 
Brandon Yu 
Gavin udall 
AF 
Mono X 
David martin 
Andrew Basch 
Jamie Prentice 
Andris Bruno 
OZEKI, Kazutaka 
Robertson Sondoh Jr 
The Keyboard Pilgrim 
Andrew Wright 
Andy Bartlett 
Christian Nienhaus 
Gordon Volcano 
Fabrice Gatille 
Benjamin Lamberth 
Ksandajja 
Simon Morris 
Shad Corliss 
Weery 
Chris Rice 
Mike Sheppard 
Stuart Lloyd 
Karl Sfictos 
Josh Rasey 
Steve Read 
Christopher Baron 
Gordon Wincott 
Lonnie C. Daniel 
Terry Lane 
Graham Bailey 
Lee Rimmer 
Bruno Raymundo 
Oliver Peltier 
Ardghal 
ordinal 
Andrei Baltakmens 


--- PAGE 435 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
434
Steve Davis 
Lucas Salton Cardinali 
Lars, Man of Letters 
Matthew Ellis 
Randy Mosiondz 
Alessandro Viola 
Peter (Toegun) Cartwright 
Renaud Velter 
Steve Murphy 
Stephen Cooper 
Keith Stickland 
Mike Jones 
Tony Kerstan 
James 
Meg Warrington 
Roger Bailey 
Mr. Kelly Jeau G. Larson 
Russell Hoyle 
Tom Cameron 
Don Myers 
Michael Morales 
David Hobson 
Tom McVey 
james david merryman 
Dave P. 
YHL 
Simon Brown 
Graeme Rigg 
Gareth Morgan 
Quiet guy keeps to himself 
Jeff Belmour 
Mel Hall 
Daniel Gregory 
Joel Siragher 
cauldronofevil 
Magnus Lauglo 
Classic Roll Player 
Fabio Mascarenhas 
Jeff Witty 
Trevor Smith 
Greg Wood 
Jonathan Churin 
Alex Packwood 
Chris Burrow 
Ian Stead 
Marco F 
Ryan Z 
Joseph Pruitt 
Gary Duke 
Ian geronimo Brumby 
Zarek Strong 
Chris Trapp 
Brett Schofield 
Brian Turner 
Scott C Cooke 
Nebo 
Leon Harvey 
Sergio «Terrax» de la Cruz 
Lord Nightmare 
Chris McKnight 
Madison Tinsley 
David Ishmael 
Thomas 'Mastadaddy' Roesch 
Brian S 
Norwolf 
Rebecca Scott 
TJ Mckechnie 
Kevin shilling 
Nicolas Ezeyza 
Sven Jesus Martinez Lutzke 
Through X's post. 
Scott Wilkinson 
KJ Potter 
Graham Wilkes 
Emerald Orchid 
Thomas R. 
Frank Turfler 
Justin-Lee Morrison 
Mark Winkelman 
Tim D. Griffin 
Ron Schachtner 
Arthur Dougherty 
Christian Poewe 
M. Ogando 
ELF Vesala 
Paul Gaston 
Pikey Berbil 
Mark C 
Tim T 
Ricardo Pereira Ramalho 
Christopher Crumpet 
Jamie Fry 
Dead Steve 
Adam Pulman 
Jonathan Hill 
Fred Lepley 
Daniel Ryan 
Brass Jester 
Chuck McGrew 
Jane Spencer 
Charlie Redux 
Newt Newport 
Lee Carnell 
Timbar 
Lou 
Gareth Banks 
Ross O'Dell 
Skenderax 
Fosselman 
Ian Stronach 
Matt C 
Michael Whiting 
Chris Bate 
Tom Ferguson 
tatibana 
Oliver Morrod 
Paul 
Brinkley Hunt 
Anthony Mandal 
W.D.P. Ellam 
Stephen O'Shea 
Mark J 
Dameon Gaynor 
Michael O Donohoe 
Tom Geraghty 
Blasto 
Lance Morin 
Michael G Palmer 
SoManyRats 
Nicholas Hutchind 
Gerard Cagayat 
Mike Mauter 
FlacoAlto 
Adam Conlan 
Hero Antagonist 
J Cole Pope 
Christopher Lockey 
Paul & Tiggy 
Martin Costello 
Mark Wilson 
Ian McKay 
Ace Fortune 
Ahtzl 
Jayson Holovacs 
Justin Woodman 
Will H 
jean-philippe viau 
James Howat 
Meidrym Hebda 
Jake Staines 
tim.j.booth@gmail.com 
HyphenPunk 
BeZurKur 
Kian Vincent 
Uwe Schumacher 
Steve Harper 
Jason Collis 
Stephen Hoare 
Gholana 
Michael Stevens 
Edvin Aghanian 
Jess Nickelsen 
Tim J 
Luigi Wilks 
NJ Glassford 
Troy Tarrant 
Martin Pinkerton 
Tom Nowell 
kenny wong 
Grant Mcvittie 
CG 


--- PAGE 436 ---

Appendices
435
Philip W Rogers Jr 
Sapper Joe Collins 
Hirochika Suzuki 
Eduardo J. Caldera 
Theodore Ketchum 
Allen H Leung 
Ebest 
Kerry Cook 
Steven Watkins 
Christopher Lowery 
David King 
Patrick "Doc Belmont" Demo 
Nikolaos Stamatopoulos 
Steven Dean 
Matt Town 
triptonite 
Clemens Gruhl 
Shaun Hately 
Doc Shepherd 
Tim E 
Zsolt Matyusz 
Tim Knight 
Peter Wright 
Jean-François Beauchef 
anon 
Andrew Sekela 
Al Livingstone 
Craig Anderson 
Cailean Tobin 
karl deckard 
Eulogio gutierrez 
Chris Best 
William Chapman 
CharlesDM 
Gabriel Conroy 
Paul nowak 
magamo_akira 
Worldwalker 
Paul James 
Stephen Marron 
Trevor Critchley  
Alexander Peterhans 
Toshikazu Kobayashi 
Timolution 
Todd Stephens 
Khanach 
Justin Cameron 
David Sullivan 
James 'The Great Old One' Burke 
Chris Mainwaring 
Dave Barker 
Dustin Rector 
James Bernard Roth 
Dr. Eperjesi Andras 
Greg Kirkpatrick 
Paul Ryan 
Dominic Hemy 
Keisuke Katsuhara 
Paul Harrison 
Freddie Broadbent 
Nessalantha 
Chris Shields 
Phillip McGregor 
Elvin Presse-Lait 
Marc "Traveller" Miller 
Jason Dennis 
David Stephenson 
Phil Wathan 
Roger Leung 
mayosuke 
Martin Stein & Scott Saxon 
Gri7 
Matthew Johnson 
Glen Sharman 
Jude L 
Tamanegi Sunaga 
owljey 
Peter Seckler 
Mike Jessup 
Krull 
Nostradamus 
Hsieh, Wei-Hua 
Thaldon Magedrake 
Koreppi 
Dave Radmore 
Hagakure 
Oyajiru 
Reverend Butch Smith 
Steve Dodge 
Dan Layman-Kennedy 
Minoru Natsutani 
Phil Pursglove 
Zoltán Monoki 
Sam Flintlock 
Jason Bardo 
Ken Richter 
Searhin 
No thanks 
Cheryl Howard 
Lars Quante 
Francis Greenaway 
Tanubee 
Nick Gibbins 
My name in the credits 
Martin Strain 
Gaz Grym 
Daan 
Warren C 
Graeme Moore 
Alex Peyton 
Aaron Chu 
Go Miyauchi 
Holly E 
Cain McInerney 
Russell Goudge 
Timothy B. Gutierrez 
Andrew Davis 
Patrick Tullis 
Patrick Crusiau 
Tommy Chu 
Mark Leymaster of Grammarye 
Jason Sunday 
Mark Featherston 
Marc Schluetter 
Magisterunus 
Erick McGhee 
Doug Schnur 
David Jayr 
Ken Wicks 
Robert Granville 
Thiago Carrascosa 
Ken Finlayson 
Derrick C 
Stefan Karlsson 
Michael K J 
Terry d’Orleans 
Sébastien Delisle 
Frank R Hussey 
ZurielRedux 
Eleanor McHugh 
David "UrsaTeddy" Vega 
Balmonec 
M.H 
Gustavo Rocha 
Cussa Mitre 
Simon Lloyd 
Bruce Gulke 
林立人 Lin Liren 
Clive Sutherland 
Mario M. Butter 
Chuck McKnight 
Emma C 
DerKastellan 
Marky Mark 
Paul Roest 
John "Aracnarua". Hume 
Don Pierce 
Devon Hood 
t-lo 
Okatan555 
Matthew Luellen 
A.A. 
Steve Pugh 
D. E. Weeks 
Liam Kemble-Young 
Mr Grebo 
Philip Stein 
Al-Trujillo 
Frank Kieling 


--- PAGE 437 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
436


--- PAGE 438 ---

Appendices
437
INDEX
A
Abandoned Shack  138
Academia   249
Acid Bath  146,  182
Acolyte  99
Adventurer  174
Adventurer Guild Goods  403
Adventurer’s Guild Contract Rewards  402
Adventurer’s Guild Contracts  400
Adventurer’s Guild Services  405
Airship  236
Alarm  179
Alchemist’s Workshop  151
Alcove  179
Allies & Enemies  261
Ancient Hallows  220
Animals  24
Apothecary  105
Archery Contest  121
Area  27
Area of Effect  18
Area of Wild Magic or Chaos  235
Armoured  166
Armourer  142
Artisan  109
A8empt a Con  15
A8raction  19
Auction House  154
Avoiding Encounters  55
Avoiding Spells  17
Awareness  9
B
Band of Pilgrims / Barbarians  217
Bargain  11
Bathhouse  153
Ba8le Tactic  312
Befudle  20
Beggar  115
Beyond the Pit  7
Biological  163
Birth Month  261
Black Powder explosion.  122
Blood Vines  227
Boatman  226
Bone Pile  230
Borrow a map  196
Breach  20
Bribe  15
Broken Trap  147
Buried buildings / Ruins  163
Burn  19
Burning House  125
Burnt Out building  98
C
Call for Aid!  87
Campaign Missions  319
Campsite  228
Captive  174
Cartographers Shop  141
Casting Spells in Secret  18
Catacomb Condition  82
Catacomb Encounters  83
Catacomb Origin  81
Catacombs Entrance  80,  137
Cave  162
Cellars  162
Challenge encounters  55
Chambered  180
Chaos Horror  134
Chaos Rune  147
Chaos Unleashed  272,  307
Chaos Wrought  163
Childhood Life Experience  263
Children  114
Chilled  165
Choking Dust  180
Choosing a Villain  278
Citadel or Fortress  233
City  46
City Gate (Wall)  74
City Lore  9
Clu8ered  180
Coins  419
Collapsing Ground!  136
College  70
Combat Companion  7
Combat Complications  390
Command  21
Common Encounter and Action Options  13
Commune  21
Completely Random Landscape Generation  197
Con Artist  117
Consecrated  165
Consequences of Success  409
Consumable Items  421
Cool  19
Corridors  184
Counterspelling and Dispelling  18


--- PAGE 439 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
438
Crafting  12
Create a map  196
Creating a Dungeon Map  167
Creating a Mission, Adventure or Quest  370
Creating Factions  258
Creating Patrons and Allies  313
Creating Quests & Missions  369
Creating your Wilderness  196
Creature Condition  166
Crevasse  217
Critical  11
Crumbling  165
Crypt  162
Cunning Trap  181
Current Occupation  49
Cursed Weapons & Armour  422
Curtain  179
Cutpurse  119
Cu8hroats  128
D
Darkness  20
Darkseeing  20
Dead Zone  235
Deadly Trap  181
Death and dying  25
Deathtrap’ Dungeons  238
Decay’s power  21
Demonic  23
Demons  237
Descriptions of Social Status  246
Desert  211
Desperate Chef  96
Determine Privileges  245
Devious Trap  146
Difficulty Level  29
Diplomacy  382
Diseases  124
Disguise  10
Disjointed  179
Docks (or Customs House)  69
Dodge  13
Drink a Potion  16
Drinking Den  67
Drop stone  147
Drunken Dwarf  98
Dry  19
Dungeon  27,  163
Dungeon Condition  165
Dungeon Entrance  230
Dungeon Themes  237
Dungeons  161
Duration  18
Dwarf Pedlar  92,  175
Dwarven Halls / Mines  163
Dwarven Scout  175
Dwarven Se8lement  233
Dying Man  117
E
Eat a Meal  15
Elementals  23, 24
Elven Se8lement  233
Elven Sorcerer  175
Encounter  27
Encounters in a Se8lement  54
Encumbrance  26
Endurance  14
Enhance  19
Entertain  19
Environment Descriptions  204
Escaped Slave  91
ESP  20
Experience Rewards  407
Explode  21
Exploration  386
Exposure  203
Extinguish  19
F
Failing a task  377
Falling Masonry  120
Falling Nightsoil  120
Family & Clan  261
FAR  21
Farmer  103
Feed  15
Ferocious Hailstorm  217
Fight  13
Fighting in the Streets  83
Find  21
Finding a random location / area / room  391
Finding your Way & Mapping  196
Fire Sprite Arsonist  129
First Aid  16
First Strike  16
Flee  13
Flimsy Door  179
Flooded  180
Fly  21
Followers  257
Food & Drink  203
Foraging  202
Forced March  200
Forest  206


--- PAGE 440 ---

Appendices
439
Forest Lore  9
Forgo8en Cellar  138
Forgo8en Path  225
Forgo8en Stash  149
Fountain or Spring  181
Friar  112
Frozen Bodies  229
Fulkra’s power  21
Fumbles  11
Funeral Cortege  120
Fungi  181
Fur Trader  108
Fury of the Gods  271
G
Garbage Heap  60
General Dungeon Rules  186
General Goods kiosk  142
General Tasks  383
Generating a Catacomb  80
Generating a map  50
Ghost  175,  228
Ghost Town  234
Ghoul  123
Giant  230
Giant Rat  123
Giant Spider  130
Glimmer  19
Glowing eyes  20
Glu8onous Merchant  96
Gnome Explorer  174
Goblin / Orc Se8lement  234
Goblin Infiltrator  125
Grand Illusion  21
Grannits  132
Graveyard  68
Great Beasts  24
Group of Noblewomen  104
Group of Traders  92
H
Hag  94
Handling Social Rank  256
Haunted House  237
Hear  19
Heat  19
Heavy Door:  179
Henchman  28
Herbalist  220
Herd of Beasts  220
Herd of Wild Boar  229
Hero ‘Grade’  30
Hero’s Motivation  372
Heroes Companion  7,  195
High Magic  237
Hills  207
Hiring a Guide  204
Hobgoblin Spy  126
Hold  19
Holdings  245
Holy Man  174
Homestead (Abandoned, Inhabited).  218
Honesty  19
Hospital  71
HOW  21
Humanoids  24
Hunting & Foraging  202
Hunting Wyvern  219
I
Identifying Magical Items  422
Ignite  20
Illusion  20
Increasing Encounters  56
Individual vs Group Awards  408
Inebriate  19
Infernal  165
Infested  166
Inn  65
Insect Swarm  229
Instil  19
Intimidate  15
J
Jail  64
Jungle  212
K
Keep  77
Keeping track of time  26
KID  21
Knight-Errant  109
Known path or track  199
L
Lair  162
Landslide  227
Latrine  139
Lawbreaker Table  86
Lazy  166
Leadership  9


--- PAGE 441 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
440
Leaf Beasts  131
Leeches  230
Leper  90
Leper Colony  231
Level of Control  240
Levitate  20
Libra’s power  21
Lifepaths  260
Lighting  186
Limited Skills  10
Location  27
Locked Door  179
Lost World / Dino-Land  236
LUCK  8
Ludria  36
Lust for Power  273
M
MAGIC  8
Magic Door  148
Magic Items  422
Magic Lore  8
Magic Wrought  163
Magic-Wizardry  10
Magical Curiosity Shop  144
Magically Barren  165
Magically Fecund  165
Map  180
Map Creation  196
Map encounters  55
Mapping Your City, Town or Village  48
Mark of Death  25
Marketplace  73
Marsh & Swamp  213
Marsh Lights  225
Mass Brawl!  125
Men-at-arms  106
Mercantile  255
Merchant  219
Messenger  114
Military  251
Minor spells  19
Mirage  231
Misplaced Wizard  174
Mission  27
Mission Complications  393
Mission Playthrough  38
Mission Timer or Countdown  394
Missions, Quests & Adventures  37
Mistake  19
Misty  165
Modify Social Skills  245
Monster Behaviour  176
Monster Encounter Tables  171
Monster Templates  31
Monster Weapons & Armour  176
Monster!  222
Monsters -  what are we fighting?  388
Monstrous Fly  133
Morality  239
Mountain Lore  9
Mountains  208
Movement Tasks  380
N
Natural Light  180
Natural World  274
Night Watchman  110
Nigh8ime and Resting  56
Nobility  252
Nobleman  106
Noise  20
Noisy  166
Nook  179
NPC  27
O
Oops!  11
Opponent  28
Opposed skill test  9
Optional Rule: The ‘Quiet City’  56
Orc Raider  132
Orcs & Goblins  238
Origin  261
Other Planes  235–236
Out of the Pit  7
Outlaws  224
Overgrown  165
P
Pair of Mummers  107
Park  75
Patrol  224
Peace  20
Peasant  99
Permanent Features  198
Personality Quirk  267
Physical appearance  260
Pie Seller  102
Pied Piper  20
Pillaging & Skinning  415
Pit  179
Pit Trap  147,  228


--- PAGE 442 ---

Appendices
441
Place of Execution  152
Place of Rest  217
Plagued  166
Plains  205
Plains Encounter Table  205
Poisoned Dart  146
Political Systems & Religion  239
Polluted Zone  234
Popular Acclaim  246
Port Blacksand  8
Portcullis  179
Predator  221
Priest  100
Prospectors  229
Puppet Show  95
Push and slip  20
Q
Quicksand  226
Quiet Crossroads  136
Quiet Fishing Spot  137
R
Random Monster Generator  223,  389
Random Wilderness Area  28
Randomised Knowledge Tasks  381
Randomised Magic Tasks  379
Randomly Generated Villains  304
Ranged Weapons  186
Rat run  180
Ratman  128
Ravenous Slime  129
Religion  241
Religion Lore  9
Religious Inclination of the Se8lement or Region  241
Repulsion  20
Rest  16
Resting in a dungeon  186
Return to the Pit  7
Riches  166
Riding vs Walking  203
Ripen  20
Rivers & Lakes  214
Roads & Se8lements  200
Rogues Cubby  149
Room Condition  180
Room Contents  168
Room Entrance Features  178
Room Features  178,  181
Room Occupants  170
Room Types  168
Rowdy Barbarian  101
Rubble  179
Rumours and Events  269
Runaway Horse  126
Runed  180
S
Salamonis  8
Sanctuary  21
Scavenger  105
Sea Lore  10
Second Sight  10
Secret Door  181
Secret Doors  184
Secret or Private Societies  254
Secrete  20
Section  27
Sentry  20
Servant  97
Setbacks  391
Se8lement  27
Se8lement / Ruins  226
Se8lement Challenge Encounters  118
Se8lement Creation Rules  46
Se8lement Locations  52
Se8lement Map Encounters  135
Se8lement Origins  48
Se8lement Placement  49
Se8lement Social Encounters  89
Se8lement Specific Rules  83
Se8lements  45
Sewer  162
Shady Dealer  154
Shoreline & Sea  215
Shrine  139
Side Chamber:  181
Skeleton  132
SKILL  8
Slave Takers  131
Sleight of Hand  88
Slimy  165
Sloped  180
Slum Alleys  61
Small Well  136
Smithy  140
Sneaking  8
Social encounters  55
Social Rank  27,  244
Social Rewards  409
Social Status and Rank  243
Soldier  116
Sorcerer’s Wyrd  150
Specific God  242
Specific Tasks  375


--- PAGE 443 ---

AFF Adventure Creation System
442
Spell Ranges:  18
Spellbook  25
Spending experience  408
Spiked Stick  147
Spore Bag  147
Spray of Acid  147
Squire  95
Stacking Spells  18
STAMINA  8
Stampede  216
Starting A Campaign  315
Starting Events  316
Starving  166
Status talent  244
Stealing and thievery  88
Stores:  181
Street Factors  84
Streets  63
Student  116
Subterfuge Tasks  384
Suffering Penitent  103
Surly Watchmen  101
Survivor Talent  202
Swamp Gas  230
Swarm of Rats  133
Swords  8
Sworn Enemy  266
T
Ta8oo Parlour  152
Tavern  66
TEL  21
Temple  57
Temple (TE) Location Encounters  59
Terrified Prospector  174
Test for promotion or demotion  245
Test of SKILL  8
Test your Rank  245
The Changing Seasons  204
The Claws & Thorns  288
The Coven  284
The Emerald Scale  294
The Gods  261
The Hero’s Motivation.  261
The Horde  292
The House of Swords  300
The Inquisitor  286
The Magician  280
The Necromancer  290
The Nest Mother  296
The Quest Hook  370
The Sorcerer  282
The Sphinx  225
The Syndicate  298
The Warlord  302
Theatre  78
Themed Dungeons  177
Thief  175
Time  26
Tithe Collector  111
Toady  93
Tomb Mist  134
Town  46
Town Crier  91
Townsfolk  115
Toxic  166
Transition Rooms  185
Trap  181
Trapper  221
Traps  182
Travel Time  199
Travelling at Night  201
Travelling the Wilds  199
Treasure  26,  413
Treasure & Encumbrance  418
Treasure Locations  416
Treasure Rewards  410
Treasure Tables  414
Trick  15
Trivia & Gossip  276
Troglodytes  130
Trumpeter  94
Tundra & Ice  209
Types of Creature  415
Typical mission objectives  374
U
Una8ended stall  122
Undead  23,  237
Under equipped  166
Unholy  165
Unlawful Actions  85
Unmarked Passage  180
Unstable  180
Unstoppa-Ball  146
Unusual areas of Wilderness  234
Unusual Dungeons  236
Unusual Life Experience  264
Unusual Locations & Themes  233
Unusual Se8lements  233
Unveiling Rooms  169
Upwelling of Magic  148
Use Etique8e  15
Use Stealth  14
Uses of Social Rank  245
Using Bargain & Evaluate  417


--- PAGE 444 ---

Appendices
443
Using LUCK whilst exploring  204
Using Magic  17
Usrel’s power  21
V
Valuables  420
Verlang’s power  21
Village  47
Villain  28
Villains  37,  277
Volcano  234
Vortex of Magic  146
W
Wandering Elf  106
Wandering Monsters  186
Wary  166
Wealthy Streets  62
Weaponsmith  11,  143
Weather protection  20
Wedding party  93
Well lit  165
Well-fed  166
Who is in Charge?  243
Wild Creatures  238
Wilderness Encounters  216
Wildernesses  195
Wildfire  228
Winds of Magic  270
Witchsniffer  113
Workshop  153,  181
Wrestling Contest  127
Y
Young Dragon  232
Young Noble  97
Z
ZEN  21
ZIP  21


--- PAGE 445 ---

