

--- PAGE 67 ---



--- PAGE 68 ---

N
ot all Heroes are iron-thewed barbarians or chain
clad warriors.  Some Heroes are able to harness
mystical power and use ancient and arcane arts to
powerful and spectacular effect.  Some Heroes will know
a few cantrips to make life just that little bit easier, whilst
others will use much more powerful spells.
Magic using Heroes are often vulnerable in combat, but
can also wield incredible power.
Basic Concepts
There are a few concepts common to each of the magic
types, and these are explained first, followed by rules for
each specific type.
MENTAL Characteristic
All Heroes that desire to use Magic must have at least one
point in the MENTAL Characteristic.  This characteristic
mayaffect the chance of successfully casting a spell, the
amount of arcane power available and even the potency
of some spells.  A Hero wanting to use a few cantrips or
minor spells may only need a point or two in this
characteristic, whilst a fully fledged Wizard will need a
lot more!
Magic Points
Spells of both the Minor Magic and Wizardry Magic types
are powered by mystical energies that accumulate in each
living being.  This power is represented by the Magic
Points score.  A higher natural affinity with magic and
magical training both increase the amount of power
available to a spell caster.
If a Hero has any points in the Magic-Minor or Magic-
Wizardry special skills, their Magic Point total should be
calculated before play, and recalculated if necessary.  The
Magic Point score is calculated as follows:
(MENTAL Characteristic + Magic-Wizardry special skill) x
2
That is, 2 Magic Points for every point in that characteristic
and special skill.  These points are available every day to
a Hero, and are replenished by a nights sleep.  If the Hero
has disturbed sleep or less than a full night, the Director
may reduce the number of points gained.  A Hero may
never restore their Magic Point total above the calculated
value by sleep or potions.  An increase in one of the
contributory factors will however increase the magic Point
maximum value.
Spellcasting roll
The rules for casting a spell are very similar to the main
rule mechanic.  That is roll two 6 sided dice and total the
results.  If that total is less than or equal to the Heroes
MENTAL characteristic plus the appropriate Magic special
skill, the spell is successfully cast.  If the total is higher, the
spell is not cast.  If the result is a double 6, regardless of
the target number, the spell has failed more spectacularly
and a roll must be made on the Oops table (which says it
all!).
There will probably be modifiers and even exceptions to
this roll for each magical type and situation, but as usual
the Director is the final arbiter.
Spells are usually cast in one combat round, but may also
be prepared for longer.  This preparation cannot be
interrupted, and the casting round must follow the
preparation immediately.  It is fairly obvious to all
observers that the spellcaster is preparing a spell.
Oops…
Even the most proficient of spell casters can make
mistakes in the intricate series of hand gestures and
spoken phrases that constitute the spell.       If the
spellcaster rolls a double 6 on their spellcasting test, the
spell has failed and must immediately roll on the Oops
table below.  This table will describe what  actually
happens when the caster completes the casting.        The
effects should be applied immediately as appropriate for
the situation.
MAGIC        67
CHAPTER 4 – MAGIC


--- PAGE 69 ---

Oops Spell Failure Table
  3D6     Spell Failure Effect
3       
Caster is turned into a toad for 2D6 minutes.
The  toad retains the casters intelligence but is
in all other respects a normal toad.
4 
 
Caster immediately ages by 2D6 years.  This is
permanent and irreversible.
  5       
There is a brief but heavy rain of fish in an area
50m across.  All further physical actions in the
 
 
area are at  -2 due 
to the slipperiness
 
 
underfoot.  There is also sufficient fish for
many good meals!
6     
The Casters speech is garbled for 1 hour,
 
 
 
preventing verbal communication and
 
 
 
spellcasting.
 
7        Caster has constant hiccups for 1D6 hours, and
has a penalty of -4 to spell casting during that
 
time.
 
8       
The Caster grows a tail (the type is chosen by
 
 
 
the  Director).  This remains for 1 week.
 
9       
All Gold Pieces carried by the caster turn into
 
 
 
butterflies and flap around randomly in the area.
10     
An Orc (7 SKILL / 8 STAMINA) materialises
 
 
 
beside  caster, and is very angry…..
 
11     
The Casters hair turns bright blue.  This will
 
 
 
only change as the hair grows out.
12      The Casters shoes catch fire.  See Chapter 3 for
 
 
 
fire rules.  These shoes are now ruined.
13      The Caster grows a pair of curly goats horns.
 
 
 
These  remain for 1 day.
 
14      A dead giant squid appears above the head of
a  random party member.  The falling squid
 
causes  1D3 points  of STAMINA damage
 
and knocks the  Hero down.
 
15      The Casters hair grows rapidly for 1 hour,
 
 
 
ending up floor length.
 
16      The weapons of everyone within sight of the
 
 
 
caster turn into bunches of flowers.  The sparks
radiating  
from  
the 
caster 
make 
it
 
blatantly obvious that the  caster is the source of
this change.  Magical weapons  
return 
t o
normal after 10 minutes, but all other changes
are irreversible.
 
17      The Caster immediately changes sex.  Only a
 
 
 
powerful Archmage can reverse this.
 
18      The Caster vanishes…. (At the Directors
 
 
 
discretion,  the Caster may reappear,
 
 
 
unconscious, some short time  later within a
 
 
 
mile or so of the casting point, smoking
 
 
 
gently!)
Resisting Magic
Some magical spells and powers can be resisted by their
target, even if they are cast successfully.  Any spells that
can be resisted are stated as such in each description.  The
same goes for most magical items and creature powers.
If it is not clearly stated whether a spell or power can be
resisted, it falls to the Director to decide.
If a Hero is targeted with a spell that can be resisted, and
the spell is cast successfully, the Hero must immediately
Test their LUCK. A successful test means that the spell
fails to have its full effect (although some spells may well
do something, even if the Hero is lucky) and a failed test
means that the spell has its full effect. As with other uses
of LUCK, the Heroes current LUCK score is reduced by 1
point regardless of the result.  A Hero may also,
voluntarily choose not to Test their LUCK, which will
cause them to take the full effect of the spell, but will also
not reduce their current LUCK score.
If a monster or NPC without a LUCK characteristic is
targeted by such a spell, they instead test their SKILL. The
fact that the SKILL of the monster is not reduced after each
test should not cause too many problems in most cases.
It is also possible for a spellcaster to reduce the chance of
a target making their magic save.  If the caster invests extra
magic points (wizard) or STAMINA (sorcerer) into the
spell purely for the purposes of reducing a targets
resistance, the test for LUCK must be modified by this
amount.  Thus a Wizard wishes to cast Fear onto an enemy
warrior.  Wanting to make extra sure the warrior fails his
test for LUCK, the Wizard spends an extra 4 magic points.
The warrior has a LUCK of 9, but to resist this spell must
roll a 5 or less (LUCK 9 minus 4 modifier).  These extra
points must be invested before the spell casting test is
made.
68     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 70 ---

Minor Magic
Some magic has been developed to make the life of the
magician just that little bit easier.  These Minor Magic
spells (also known as Cantrips) are easy to cast and low
in effect.  Adventurers find them useful, and some
travelling conjurers make a living entertaining villagers
with them.  cantrips are easy to learn and cast, and require
very little magical power.
To learn Minor Magic spells requires a MAGIC
characteristic of at least 1, and at least 1 point in the
Magic-Minor special skill.  A Hero start knowing 3 Minor
Magic cantrips for every point they have in the Minor
Magic special skill.  These cantrips should be chosen when
the Hero is created.
To cast a Minor Magic spell requires a standard
spellcasting roll with a bonus of +6 to reflect the ease of
casting.  A spellcaster’s total of his Magic characteristic
and his Magic-Minor special skill is refereed to as his
“Incantation” score.
Some additional modifiers may also apply:
Cantrip Casting Situation 
Modifier
 
Each round of preparation 
 
+2
 
Quiet surroundings                                +3
 
Not under attack                                     +0
 
Caster is Target of 1 ranged attack       -1
 
Caster is Target of >1 range attacks   -2
 
Target of 1 melee attack                        -2
 
Target of >1 melee attack                    
-4
If the spellcasting roll succeeds, the cantrip is cast and no
magic points need be deducted.  If the spellcasting roll
fails, one magic point must be expended.  If a double 6 is
rolled on the spellcasting roll, 2 magic points must be
deducted.
To acquire new cantrips, a caster need simply increase his
Magic-Minor special skill.  Each additional point gained
will allow the caster to choose three more cantrips, either
immediately or at some time in the future.  A Hero may
not have more than three cantrips per point in the Magic-
Minor special skill.
PLAY TIPS: Minor Magic cantrips will not usually defeat
enemies or create powerful effects.  They will however make the
life of a magician somewhat easier.  The starting selection of
spells should be chosen carefully however, as many of these spells
can come in very useful in specific situations.  These spells can
even be useful for a non-magician Hero, although the acquisition
of these spells will of course come at the expense of other abilities.
It is probably a good idea to try and choose a “theme” for the
minor magic spells known, and the Instil cantrip is often a good
choice.
Minor Magic Cantrips
Listed below are the common Minor Magic spells.  This
list is by no means exclusive and the Director should feel
free to add to this list.
Attraction
This cantrip makes the target find one other person
seriously attractive.  The caster must either touch the
target or Instil this cantrip into a drink.  The subject of the
attraction need not be present but if not the caster must
know the subject reasonably well.  The cantrip will last an
hour or so, and will usually override any previous feelings
held by the target towards the subject.  However, this
cantrip will not force the target to act completely out of
character.
Burn
This cantrip creates a small flame in the palm of the casters
hand, lasting up to one minute if desired.  This flame can
be used to lights a candle, lantern or campfire, or will do
one point of STAMINA damage if applied to an unaware
target.  This flame will of course damage anything held
by the caster in that hand, but can be dispelled simply by
closing the hand into a fist.
Cool
This cantrip will cool one object or person down.  If used
on a living being, the spell will not cause any freezing
damage, but will make a being feel cool or even cold,
regardless of the ambient temperature.  If used on an
inanimate object, the temperature may be taken down
almost to freezing.  As usual, an unwilling target may Test
for LUCK to avoid the effects.  Regardless of the target,
the effects will last for 3D6 minutes (rolled in secret) after
which the surrounding temperature will start to reassert
itself.
Dry
This spell will instantly evaporate all of the water from
one inanimate object such as an item of clothing, book etc.
Although this cantrip will not affect oil, it will affect all
water-based liquids.
Enhance
This minor illusion improves the appearance of a small
item or group of items.  This could make rotten food
appear succulent or an old and battered item appear new
and shiny.  A successful test against Awareness or a
successful test for LUCK will allow an observer to see
through the deception.  The effects will last 1D6 minutes
(rolled in secrets).
Entertain
This cantrip will cause a small visual illusion to appear on
the casters outstreched hand.  The illusion will be
reasonably detailed, and may perform any actions that the
caster desires, as long as they take place on the casters
MAGIC        69


--- PAGE 71 ---

hand.  The illusion will last 2D6 minutes, and is mainly
used by travelling conjurers to earn a few small coins.
Extinguish
This cantrip will put out a small fire, usually the size of a
lamp or candle flame in size.  The spell caster needs to be
able to see the flame to extinguish it.  Larger flames, up to
the size of a campfire, can be extinguished, but have a
penalty of -1 to -3 to the spellcasting roll.  Flames are
extinguished immediately, although smouldering embers
may remain.   This cantrip will not work on any sort of
magical flame.
Glimmer
Creating a Light in the darkness is useful for all
adventurers, even dwarfs and elves.  The Wizardry spell
“Light” is able to create a bright light suitable for reading
or illuminating a wide area, but sometimes all that is
needed is a faint light.  This cantrip creates a dim glow,
either on the hand of the caster or a small object, lasting
for 2D6 minutes.  This glow is equivalent to that given out
by the embers of a fire, and will illuminate an area enough
to see large shapes in the gloom.
Hear
This cantrip allows the caster to listen in on a conversation
that he can see, but may be out of earshot.  Whilst the spell
is active (which is either one conversation or 2 minutes,
whichever is shorter) the caster can only really hear the
target conversation.  If the conversation is being conducted
at a whisper, there is a penalty of -2 to the spellcasting roll.
Heat
This minor magic spell will heat up one object or being.
As with the Cool minor magic spell, this will not inflict
any damage.  When used on an inanimate object, that
object may be heated up to what a person would regard
as “very hot”.  When used on a living being, their
temperature may be increased so that they feel hot,
equivalent to being in full sun in a tropical area.  An
unwilling target may test for LUCK to avoid the effects,
and like Cool, the effects will last 3D6 minutes (rolled
secretly).
Hold
This cantrip fixes one small object in place for 30 seconds.
This could include sticking a sword in a scabbard,
attaching a boot sole to the floor or even sticking a rider’s
trousers to a saddle!  An unwilling target may Test for
LUCK to avoid the effects of this spell.
Honesty
When this cantrip is cast upon a target, who must also be
touched as the spell is cast, the result is that the target
admits one lie they have just told.  The target may test for
LUCK to avoid the effects, and must have told a lie in the
very recent past.  If several separate lies have been told,
the Director decides which one is admitted.
Inebriate
When this spell is cast and the target touched, the target
immediately becomes very, very drunk.  The target may
of course test for LUCK to avoid the effects, but if this test
is failed, the target will have a penalty of -2 to pretty much
all actions.  The drunkenness will wear off after an hour
or so, but can also be removed with the Sober cantrip or
a counterspell.  The Instil cantrip can be used in
conjunction with this one to make a mug of beer or other
drink very potent indeed!
Instil
This very useful cantrip allows the caster to introduce the
effects of one minor magic spell into a drink or food.  The
Instil and effect cantrips must be cast at the same time,
and the magical effects are retained for 1D3 days.  When
the food is eaten or the drink drunk, the spell takes full
effect.
Jab
When this minor magic spell is used, the caster must
lightly touch the target with an extended finger.  The
target will then feel like they have been firmly jabbed with
a sharp stick.  This spell may cause 1 STAMINA point of
damage (a roll of 6 on 1D6), which will be unaffected by
any armour worn.  If the caster desires, this spell may be
used from a distance of up to 5m away with a -2 modifier
to the spell casting roll.
Mend
The Mend cantrip will repair small holes in wooden, metal
or cloth items.  A suitable patch is required to actually fill
the hole, this cantrip merely securely fixes the patch in
place.  As this cantrip only fixes a single small hole, it
could not be used to repair a broken sword or cracked
shield.
Mistake
This cantrip must be cast on one target within eyesight,
who may test for LUCK to avoid the effects.  If the test is
failed, the target makes a small mistake.  Whilst it will not
affect combat, it will however cause someone to make a
mistake when writing something down, take a wrong
turning, mix the wrong two potions together or mis-weigh
an item to be bought or sold.  The Director may rule that
this spell does not work if the effect is to major, or may
apply a modifier to the spell casting test.
70     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 72 ---

Noise
This auditory illusion causes fairly indistinct but
appropriate noises to be heard coming from a short
distance away.  This could be footsteps, murmuring
voices, rustling bushes or the squeaking of a door.  Targets
may not test for LUCK, as the sounds actually exist!
Pied Piper
This cantrip forces a nearby group of pests to follow the
caster for 2D6 minutes (rolled secretly), although the caster
cannot otherwise control them.  When the spell ends, the
vermin act as normal for their type.  This spell can affect
up to 10 rats, 100 beetles or 500 flies.  To increase the
numbers affected will incur a -2 penalty to double, a -4
penalty to treble, a -6 penalty to quadruple etc.
Pucker
This annoying cantrip will cause the mouth and cheeks of
one target within 10m to pucker uncontrollably.  The
target may test for LUCK to resist, but if the test is failed
the target will not be able to eat, drink or talk easily.  Any
social skills that rely on speech will suffer a penalty of -2,
as do any spellcasting attempts.  This cantrip will last for
1D3 minutes.
Push
Without any overt actions, this cantrip will allow the caster
to push one item or person.  The target can be up to 10m
away, and the force exerted will be roughly equivalent to
a real physical push by the caster.  The target may test for
LUCK to avoid the effects.  If affected, the target will
stumble, suffering a small penalty to physical actions that
round (-1 or -2), but is in most danger if standing near the
edge of a cliff or river.
Repulsion
This cantrip is the opposite of the Attraction Minor Magic
spell, making the target take an instant dislike to a
specified person.  This dislike will not necessarily be
violent, but will be a strong emotion.  Like Attraction, the
spell affects a touched target (or can be Instilled), the
subject of the Repulsion must be present (or known to the
caster) and the effects will last for 1 hour.
Ripen
This enchantment will cause inedible food, such as unripe
fruit, rotten meat or mouldy bread, to become edible.  This
will affect one single item of food such as a single apple
or joint of meat, and the food must be touched for the spell
to work.  This spell can also reverse the effects of a Sour
spell.
Secrete
This spell allows the caster to steal one small object
without even seeming to touch it.  The caster must be close
enough that he could touch it, and anyone actually
watching the item will see it vanish, but not where it goes
to.  The item, which should be around the size of a gold
piece, will appear in the casters pouch or pocket as desired.
Slip
This spell causes one target within 10m to slip, as if on a
banana skin under-foot.  The target may test for LUCK to
avoid the effects, which will generally amount to a -2
penalty to physical actions for one round.  If the target is
running however, they will require a test against SKILL
or go sprawling.
Smudge
This cantrip causes the writing on one page to become
blurred, smudged and unreadable.  The caster need
merely cast this spell and touch the document in question.
The smudge can be restored by casting a counterspell on
the page, but otherwise the smudging is permanent.
Sober
This spell, much beloved of any caster who spends too
much time with Dwarfs or adventurers, will instantly
sober up one intoxicated target. Simply requiring one
touch, this spell can also be Instilled into a potion for
instant sobriety!
Sour
This cantrip will spoil a single container of food or drink,
up to the size of a barrel.  The container must be touched
as the spell is cast, and the food will be soured
immediately.  Although not poisonous, the food will cause
severe stomach ache if eaten.  This spell will not affect any
sort of magical or enchanted food.
Spark
This spell will cause a small but painful spark of electricity
to jump from the casters fingertip up to 10cm away.
Although the spark will cause no real damage, it is painful
and will cause the target to jump.  This spell is most useful
for getting a domestic animal moving, or getting a
dawdling person out of the way.
Stutter
This cantrip will cause the target to stutter uncontrollably
whenever they try to speak on one particular matter
(determined by the caster).  The effects will last for up to
two minutes, and completely prevent the target talking
about the matter in question.  As is usual with this type
of spell, the target must be within 10m of the target, and
may test for LUCK to avoid the effects.  This spell will not
work on spell casting of any kind.
Weather Protection
This useful cantrip will protect the caster from the worst
of the weather for 1 hour.  In driving rain, the caster will
be merely damp.  In biting cold the caster will be chilly,
and in blazing sunshine the caster will be warm and a bit
red.  This cantrip can really increase the comfort level of
a travelling magician, but if the weather is really terrible,
the caster will still need proper protection.
MAGIC        71


--- PAGE 73 ---

WIZARDRY
Wizardry is a school of magic especially popular on the
continent of Allansia, where it is taught by experienced
practitioners to their apprentices.  Some powerful Wizards
even set up schools of magic and take on 3 or 4 apprentices
at a time.  The most famous of these is in the Forest of Yore,
founded 
by 
the 
great 
Vermithrax 
Moonchaser.
Apprentices are often chosen on the basis of ability rather
than how much they can pay, but this is not always the
case.
Wizardry magic draws its energy from the invisible arcane
power that permeates the world of Titan, and the long
apprenticeship of a Wizard uses the learning of many
millennia to develop the knowledge to use this power.
Thus Wizardry spells are powered by magic points, the
in-game manifestation of the arcane power.  A Wizard can
only channel so much power in a single day, requiring a
good sleep to recover their magic points.
Casting Wizardry Spells
To cast a Wizardry spell follows the same principles as
the standard spellcasting rules described above.  A Wizard
refers to his total of Magic characteristic and Magic-
Wizardry special skill as his “Arcane Power”, which is
recorded as such on his Hero sheet.
Spells are graded by rank, with a spell requiring as many
magic points to cast as its rank.  Thus the simplest spells
are rank 1, and cost 1 magic point to cast, whilst the most
powerful are rank 8 and generally cost 8 magic points.
There are some modifiers to the spellcasting test listed
below.  In addition to these, a spellcaster may expend
additional magic points to gain a +1 modifier to the
spellcasting roll for each additional magic point.
Wizardry Casting Situation    
 
   Modifier
 
Each round of preparation previous to casting.   
+2
 
 Quiet surroundings                                                 
+3
 
Not under attack                                                       
+0
 
Caster is Target of ranged attack                             -1
 
Caster is Target of melee attack                             
-2
A Wizard may also expend additional magic points when
casting a spell to reduce the chance of a target successfully
testing their LUCK.  Each additional magic point thus
spent is applied as a -1 penalty to the targets test for LUCK.
Additional magic points spent must be declared before
the spellcasting test is made.
If a Wizard wears any armour, then additional magic
points must be expended for every spell cast as follows:
 
Armour Worn 
Extra MP cost
 
Leather Cuirass 
+1mp
 
Leather Hauberk / Chain Cuirass 
+2mp
 
Chain Hauberk / Breastplate 
+3mp
 
Plate armour 
+4mp
A Wizard will start play knowing only a few spells, and
even those are of the lower tiers of power.  At some point
a Wizard Hero will want to learn other spells, both of low
and high power.  One requirement is for available
experience points, as described in chapter 2.  If experience
points are available, the caster must also have a way of
learning the spell.  One way to do this is to find a teacher
who already knows the spell.  This approach will take 2
days of intense tuition for every rank of the spell.  The
teacher will probably require payment for this tuition,
either in money, goods or services.  The second approach
is to learn the spell from a spellbook that contains that
specific spell.  This way will take five full days of study,
which need not be contiguous, per rank of the spell.
PLAY TIPS:  A Wizard hero will begin play knowing only a
smallish selection of  Spells, and will probably be very weak in a
hand-to-hand fight.  However, they are not weakened physically by
casting their spells, and will probably be able to cast quite a few of
the less powerful spells each day.  They should however bear in mind
that once their power is gone for the day, it is gone.  A Wizard hero
walks a fine line between using up all of their magic before a
powerful enemy is reached, and reserving their power for a powerful
enemy that never appears and thus not helping their colleagues
along the way.
Wizards are however a good choice for novice players who would
like to have a magician hero as they have a defined role and a limited
number of spells to learn.
It is also important to note that the Director controls the availability
of spells for his Wizard characters, both by allowing them to find
spell books containing new spells, but also by determining which
spells teachers will instruct.  A player may desperately want to learn
the Death spell, but unless he has a way of learning it, as determined
by the Director, he will never be able to cast it.
72    ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 74 ---

Wizardry Spells
The spells listed below are the most common of the
Allansian Wizardry spells known.  There will be other
schools of wizardry and indeed other spells, so the
Director should feel free to add in new spells as required.
The numbers listed for each spell in brackets after the
name refer to both the rank of the spell and the base magic
point cost for the spell.  Some spells have a rank listed as
a modifier, such as +1, which
is explained further in the
spell description.
Befuddle  
(1)
This spell will cause one
touched target, who may test
for LUCK to avoid the
effects, to become very
confused for one minute.
The target will struggle to
make active decisions, and
all active tests such as
combat, spellcasting, lock
picking, social tests etc will
be made with a penalty of -6.
The target will however try
and avoid danger wherever
possible and retreat to a safe
place where they will just
stand with a glazed look.
Darkness  
 
(1)
When cast, this spell will
create a 5m radius circle of
absolute darkness around
the caster.  The area of
darkness will not move, and
will cancel out both normal
light and the Dark Seeing
talent.  The darkness can be
cancelled with a Light spell
or a counterspell, but will
otherwise last for 3 minutes.
Fear  
 
 
(1)
This spell will induce terror
in one target, which may be resisted with a test for LUCK.
If the spell does take effect, the target will for two minutes
attempt to get as far away from the caster as possible.  At
the end of this time, the fear will abruptly disappear and
the target may act as normal.
Fire Bolt  
 
 
(1)
This common spell will hurl a small bolt of intense fire at
one target within 100m from the pointed finger of the
caster.  The target may either test for LUCK or instead
attempt a Dodge test to avoid being hit by the bolt.  A
target that is hit will lose 1D6 STAMINA in fire damage,
and if especially flammable, may be ignited.
Flash!   
 
(1)
This spell will cause a brief but very bright flash of light
to emanate from just in front of the caster.  Anyone within
sight will be blinded for 1D6 minutes (rolled separately
for each target) unless they state that they will be closing
their eyes or successfully test for LUCK.  The caster may
also choose to close his eyes.  Anyone who does state they
are closing their eyes will suffer a penalty of -4 to all
actions for that combat round.  The only exception to this
is that the caster will not have
a penalty to casting this spell.
If cast in an area of magical
darkness, the gloom will be
dispersed for one round only
before returning.
Glowing Eyes  (1)
This popular spell will cause
the casters eyes (or one
touched target) to glow with
a colour chosen by the caster
for up to five minutes,
although 
this 
may 
be
cancelled at will by the caster.
The glow is equivalent to a
Glimmer minor magic spell,
but may also give a bonus to
intimidation effects and may
impress primitive folks.
Ignite   
 
(1)
When cast, this spell will
cause something flammable
to 
burst 
into 
flame
(equivalent to a small fire),
which is thereafter treated as
a normal fire.  The target
must normally be touched,
although the expenditure of
an additional magic point
will allow a range of 5m, with
each additional magic point
adding another 5m.  This
spell will not ignite a living
creature unless they are
especially flammable.
Illusion  
 
 (1)
This spell will allow the caster to create one defined visual
illusion.  However, the illusion has no physical presence,
and so will be dispelled if a creature touches it, or indeed
it touches a creature, or after three minutes.  A target will
not normally have a test for LUCK to avoid the illusion,
although in some circumstances this may be allowed.  As
an example, an illusionary bridge over a chasm will vanish
as soon as a character steps onto it.  There would be no
test for LUCK to avoid the illusion itself, although there
MAGIC        73


--- PAGE 75 ---

could be a test for LUCK to avoid falling into the chasm
when the “bridge” is stepped on.
Ironhand  
 
(1)
This very popular spell grants either the caster or one
touched 
target 
an
increase of 1 to their
SKILL 
characteristic.
This will apply to all
tests that would be taken
against SKILL, and lasts
for three minutes.  Only
one of these spells may
be active at any one time
on any one target.
Light  
 
 
(1)
When cast upon one
inanimate object such as
a staff, sword or shield,
this spell will create an
area of  magical light
(about the size of a
human fist) that glows
steadily with the same
intensity as a torch.  This
light lasts for 15 minutes,
but may be cancelled at
will by the caster.  This
light will be blacked out
by a Darkness spell, but
will in turn cancel out an
existing Darkness spell.
Lock  
 
 
(1)
This spell will magically
lock a chest or door
without 
needing 
a
physical key or lock.  An
open spell will cancel the
effect, as can the caster
just by willing it, but
otherwise the door or
chest must be physically
broken to open it.  This
spell will not imbue the
door or chest with any extra physical integrity.
Open  
 
 
(1)
This spell will open any physical lock or cancel out a
magical Lock spell.  The door, chest or lock must be
touched to be affected.
Peace  
 
 
(1)
This spell will cause any two people within 5m to be
calmed down, with a test for LUCK allowed to resist the
spell.  This will only happen if the targets are not actively
fighting, and will also not prevent calmed targets from
assisting friends who are being attacked.  The expenditure
of additional magic points will allow 2 more targets to be
affected for each additional magic point spent.  This spell
will last for 2D6 minutes (rolled in secret) and will be a
fragile peace, which will be broken if an unaffected person
attacks a calmed target.
Personalise 
Spell
 
(+1)
This rank 1 spell is very
popular 
among 
the
flashier Wizards as it
allows a spell to manifest
in a particular way.  Thus
a Fear spell may appear
as dark shadows that
swirl round the target
inducing terror, and a
Restrain 
spell 
may
appear as golden chains
wrapped around the
victim.  Despite being a
rank 1 spell, there may be
an additional +1 to +6
magic 
point 
cost
depending on the extent
of the Personalisation.
This additional cost is
decided by the Director
based 
upon 
the
specification 
of 
the
player.  The Personalise
spell 
is 
not 
cast
separately, and so there
will 
only 
be 
one
spellcasting test.
Strength  
 
 
(1)
This spell imbues the
caster or one touched
target with the strength
of a troll for up to one
minute.  This will add an
additional +2 to the
Strength Special Skill of
the target and also to
damage rolls made in
hand to hand combat whilst the spell is active.
Thunder  
 
(1)
In some ways similar to the Flash! spell, this spell will
create a momentary special effect; In this case a deafening
clap of thunder.  This massive boom can be heard up to a
kilometre away, and will deafen anyone within 20m who
does not test for LUCK.  The caster will not be affected.
Affected targets will be mostly deaf for 1D6 minutes and
will struggle with communication during this time.
If the caster also knows the Flash! Spell, these may be
combined into one spell (requiring one combat round to
74     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 76 ---

cast and one spellcasting test but costing 2 magic points)
for a potent burst of sound and light.
Tongue Twister  (1)
When cast, this spell causes the targets tongue to be
temporarily tangled and unable to speak for a whole
minute.  The target may test for LUCK to avoid the effects
of the spell, but if failed will of course prevent spellcasting.
The range for the spell is 5m, although each additional
magic point expended will increase this range by 5m.
Ward  
 
 
(1)
Unusually, this spell may be cast in the same round as
another action or even another spell.  When cast, the spell
deflects one arrow, spear or other thrown or fired missile
away from the caster.  It will only work against one
missile, will only protect the caster and may only be used
once per round.  This spell will not work against magical
bolts or spells.
Weakness  
 
(1)
This spell may be cast against one target within 5m who
may test for LUCK to avoid the detrimental effects.  If
affected, the target suffers a -1 penalty to both the SKILL
characteristic and any damage rolls for 5 minutes.
Animate  
 
 
(2)
An incredibly useful spell much used by southern mystics
to create impressive rope tricks, this spell will animate
either one small item or very small item within 5m of the
caster.  The animated objects may not actually fly, but may
“hop”, slither or leap through the air and will be much
stronger than their size would suggest.  A flexible object
may articulate itself so that a rope could tie a knot in itself
or a cloak could wrap itself around a person or object.  The
animated object may be used to fight with an Attack
Strength equal to the casters MENTAL Characteristic plus
Wizardry Special Skill.  If however the item loses a combat
round and is thus struck, the spell ends and the item loses
all animation.
The spell will otherwise last for two minutes, although
this may be extended by one minute for each additional
magic point extended.  A medium sized object may be
animated with the expenditure of 2 additional magic
points, a large object for an additional 4 and a very large
object for 6 additional magic points.
Breach (2)
This spell applies raw force to an inanimate object such as
a wall, gate or door.  It has a range of 5m, and will reduce
one cubic metre to rubble or splinters.  Additional cubic
metres may be added to the effect at a cost of 2 additional
magic points per cubic metre.  The debris produced may
still partially block the breach and will need to be
manually cleared.
Breathe (2)
When cast, this spell will allow either the caster or one
touched target to breathe for 15 minutes regardless of the
quality or indeed lack of air.  Thus the recipient of this
spell could breathe underwater, in a smoke filled room or
even in a vacuum.  The caster can still breathe normally
in a standard environment.
Combine (+2)
This useful spell allows two other spells to be combined
together.  These spells together will all take only a single
round to cast, but an individual spellcasting test must be
made for each spell and magic points must be spent for
all of the spells, both those that are combined and the
Combine spell itself.  If any of the individual spellcasting
tests fail, all of the spells will fail.  Equally, if more than
one spellcasting tests results in a double 6, a separate Oops
roll must be made for each double 6.
Concentrate (+2)
If this spell is cast on the round before any other spell, the
second spell will be re-cast immediately its duration
expires without requiring a new spellcasting test or indeed
any time.  Magic points will be expended again at the time
of recasting, and the recast spell will be recast in exactly
the same form as the original casting.
Consume (2)
This spell makes use of the awesome power of fire, and
will envelop one target in flame equivalent to a large fire.
The target must be within 5m, and if a living being may
test for LUCK to avoid the effects.  If the test is failed or
the spell cast on an inanimate object, the target will be
ignited by the spell (as long as the target is flammable of
course).  The large fire will then burn normally as
described in Chapter 3.
Counterspell (2)
When cast, this spell will cancel one other spell either in
effect or in the process of being cast.   Although the
technical rank of the counterspell is 2, the magic point cost
is actually equal to the rank of the spell being cancelled
plus 1.  Minor magic spells count as rank 0 spells for the
purposes of Counterspell.  A Wizard may however only
counter spells that have a rank less than his own MENTAL Characteristic.
When actually making the spellcasting test, the
Counterspell caster must apply a special negative modifier
equal to the rank of the spell being cancelled.  If this spell
MAGIC        75


--- PAGE 77 ---

is cast successfully, the target spell is snuffed out before
it can take effect (if being cast) or immediately cancels the
target spell (if already in effect).
It is suggested that a Wizard be able to change his declared
action to counter a spell being cast, although this would
of course mean abandoning his already declared action.
Darksee (2)
This simple spell endows the caster or one touched target
to receive the benefits of the Dark Seeing talent for 20
minutes.
Ensure (2)
Nominally a rank 2 spell, this casting will prevent a
catastrophic magical failure.  This spell is cast at the same
time as any other spell, and costs the same number of
magic points as the spell it is Ensuring.  Only one
spellcasting test is made, but if a double 6 is rolled, the
caster need not roll on the Oops table.  Although costly,
this spell may well prevent catastrophe visiting the caster.
ESP (2)
This spell, which has a range of 10m, allows the caster to
look into the mind of one other living creature.  The target
may receive a test for LUCK to block the spell, but if failed
the caster can see the emotions and general thoughts of
the target.  Individual thoughts or ideas cannot be read,
but the caster would be able to tell if the target was angry,
was friendly towards the caster or was about to attack.
The spell lasts for 1 minute, but the caster must
concentrate for that time for the spell to continue working.
Farseeing (2)
This spell grants the caster with eyesight as good as an
eagle for 15 minutes.  The caster receives a +3 bonus to all
sight-based awareness tests and can see for many
kilometres, assuming line of sight.
Fog (2)
This spell is in some ways similar to the Darkness spell,
but it covers a larger area of 15m radius and lasts for 15
minutes.  The affected area is filled with very thick grey
fog with a visibility of less than a metre.  All physical
activity will be at a penalty of -6 and ranged attacks will
be impossible.  Dark Seeing will not help in this magical
fog.
Force Bolt (2)
A similar spell to Fire Bolt, this spell flings a compact bolt
of highly charged electricity that will hit a target for 1-6
points of damage, unaffected by armour.  This bolt is so
fast that it cannot be dodged or avoided, except by use of
a Counterspell or Wall spell.
Languages (2)
This spell grants the caster or one nominated target a
Language special skill of 4 in one specific language.  This
ability does not grant the ability to read or write the
language, but does give almost complete spoken fluency.
This spell will last for 1 hour.
Levitate (2)
This spell removes the effects of gravity from the caster,
one other being, or one inanimate object.  If the target is
unwilling, he will receive a test for LUCK to resist the
effects.  When active, the target can float up or down at
will (at walking pace) , under the control of the caster.
The levitated being may pull themselves sideways if there
are handholds nearby, and may also be affected by strong
winds.  The spell lasts for 5 minutes, and when it ends the
target will float gently back down to the ground.
Mirror Selves (2)
When cast, this illusion will create two copies of the caster,
all of which will act in a similar way.  In a fight, this spell
will mean that only 1 in 3 successful attacks will actually
hit the real caster, and the caster will also count as three
people for the purposes of outnumbering and any bonuses
thereof (although the copies will not cause any damage).
Even if a copy is the one hit, it will not disappear, with the
spell lasting for 3 minutes.
See Through (2)
This spell allows the caster to see through a solid object
and see what is beyond.  The basic spell will allow the
caster to see through an object up to 1 metre thick.  If the
object is more than 1 metre thick, the caster may add in
additional magic points, extending the “view” by 1 metre
each time.  The spell will last for 1 minute once the final
magic point has been used.  This spell will however only
affect one object.
Sentry (2)
Ideal when camping or resting, this spell will post a
magical guard up to 20m from the caster.  This invisible
presence will sound the alarm should anyone unwanted
approach the camp.  The classification of unwanted is
based upon the casters own viewpoint.  This sentry will
cover a 90° arc and so in the open four sentries would be
required to alert the caster.  The alert can be an audible
sound (emanating from the location of the sentry itself) or
a mental alert to the caster.  The sentries can detect hidden
and invisible enemies.
This spell could also be placed upon the mouth of a pouch,
lid of a chest etc.  The spell will last for 24 hours or until
the caster moves more than 20m from the location of the
sentry.
76     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 78 ---

Sleep (2)
This spell will put one victim to sleep for 5 minutes.  The
target may test for LUCK to avoid the effects, but if
affected, the sleep is normal.  The victim may be woken
by loud noises, wounds, shaking etc.  A Hero may
automatically kill most sleeping opponents, although this
is considered bad form in most cases!
Starry Orb (2)
This spell will create a wondrous ball of glowing light and
weaving fire, suspended in the air up to 10m away from
the caster.  This orb will distract and transfix all who see
it close at hand (within 3m).  Creatures who have average
intelligence or less will be hypnotised on a roll of 1-4 on
1D6.  A creature with high intelligence (including Heroes)
may test for LUCK or test against SKILL to avoid being
transfixed.  Any hypnotised victims simply stare agape at
the orb for the 1 minute duration of the spell.  The orb
cannot be moved from its original location.
Strong Arm (2)
This handy and popular spell adds 2 to a specific hand-to-
hand weapon special skill, either for the caster or one
touched target.  The weapon special skill must be
nominated by the caster at the time the spell is cast, and
any one target may only benefit from one of these spells
at a time.  The spell lasts for 10 minutes.
Sure Shot (2)
This spell is similar to the Strong Arm spell, but instead
applies to a single missile weapon special skill.
Where’s Home (2)
This spell will prevent a Wizard being lost in the
wilderness.  When cast, the caster will instantly be aware
of the direction that one named place lies in.  This could
indeed be the casters home, but could also be one other
place known to the caster either from a visit or from an
accurate map.  This awareness of the direction does not
imply the safest or even a passable route, and only lasts
for a few seconds.
Arrow-Snake (4)
This nasty spell causes one arrow notched on a bow and
ready for firing to instantly turn into a venomous snake!
The snake will land one automatic bite on the victim (use
small bite matrix) with an additional 2 points of damage
for the venom.  The snake will then continue to attack the
target (SKILL 7 and STAMINA 3).  The range of this spell
is 10m, and the target does not get a test for LUCK as they
spell does not affect them directly.
Command (4)
This powerful spell will allow the caster to issue a single
command to another being.  The target may of course test
for LUCK to avoid the spell, but if failed, must obey the
command.  This single command cannot be something
that would directly and obviously be harmful.  Thus a
Goblin could be commanded to close its eyes in combat
or drop its weapons, but could not be commanded to stab
itself or throw itself off a cliff.  It is important to note that
the caster does not need to speak the language of the
target.  The effects of the command cannot last longer than
30 seconds, and the Director has the final say on what does
and does not constitute a valid Command.
Explode (4)
This spell is similar to the Breach spell, but causes the
target to explode violently as if blown apart by a huge
amount of gunpowder.  The target may be up to 50m
away, and the base spell will explode up to one cubic
metre of material.  The amount of target exploded may be
increased by expending an additional 4 magic points per
cubic metre.  This spell is very slow to cast, requiring 5
minutes of uninterrupted casting and preparation per
cubic metre to be exploded.  However, when the spell is
completed, the targeted material will explode outwards,
damaging an area around the blast equal to 2 metres for
every cubic metre.  The exact damage inflicted on any
targets in this blast zone will depend on both the distance
and the material exploded.   If a living target is to be
exploded with this spell, he receives a test for LUCK to
resist the spell.
Find (4)
This spell is similar to the Where’s Home? spell, except
that the target may be absolutely any physical thing or
place.  This spell will simply provide the direction to the
nearest item of the specified type.  Thus casting this spell
to find “a gold piece” will simply provide the compass
direction to the nearest gold piece.  This spell does not
provide accurate directions nor distance, so finding the
exit from a dungeon will just point to the nearest dungeon
exit regardless of what lies in between.  As with “Where’s
Home?”, the sensation of the direction will only persist
for a short time, in this case one minute.
Fly (4)
This spell is a more powerful version of the Levitate spell,
and allows the caster or target to fly in any direction at
running pace.  The target has full control over their
movements.  The spell lasts 5 minutes and like Levitate,
the flying creature will gently float to the ground when
the spell expires.
The caster can carry a weight equivalent to that he could
carry comfortably on foot.
Gills (4)
This spell affects either the caster or one target, who must
be touched.  An unwilling target may test for LUCK as
usual to avoid the spell.  This spell creates a magical pair
of gills on the neck of the target, allowing them to breathe
underwater.  However, these gills do bypass the normal
breathing arrangements and so if the target is not
underwater, the target may well suffocate.  This spell is
permanent until cancelled by the caster or by a Counter
Spell by another Wizard.
MAGIC        77


--- PAGE 79 ---

Grand Illusion (4)
This spell is a more powerful version of the rank 1 Illusion
spell, and can include other senses such as smell, sound
and even touch.  This means that anyone struck by the
illusion will believe themselves to be injured.  The Illusion
will fight with a SKILL equivalent to the casters MAGIC
characteristic plus their Magic-Wizardry special skill.  Of
course, any wounds inflicted by the Illusion will be just
that; illusionary.  Anyone “killed” by the Illusion will
merely be unconscious for a round, and will then wake
up realising what has happened.  The illusion will
otherwise last for 3 minutes.
Grow (4)
When this spell is cast, the target, whether an object or
being, will grow half as big again almost immediately.
Thus a two metre tall man would grow to three metres in
height!  If a living creature, the target will benefit from the
effects of a Strength spell due to his increased size, and
clothing and armour will also grow to match their wearer.
This spell will last for 3 minutes, but may be cast multiple
times on one target.  An additional casting on the
aforementioned man will increase his height to 4 ½ metres,
and provide the benefits of two Strength spells!  An
unwilling target will of course receive a test for LUCK.
Invisibility (4)
This handy spell will turn the caster or one other target
invisible, along with currently carried clothes and
equipment.  This spell will not however make the target
silent, and doors etc will still need to be opened.  The
effects will last for 3 minutes or until the caster either hits
an opponent, is hit by an opponent or casts another spell.
Lightning Blast (4)
This powerful attack spell creates a huge bolt of lightning
that automatically hits one target within 5m range.  The
spell causes 2D6+2 points of STAMINA damage to the
target, and is not reduced by armour.  This spell cannot
be dodged or avoided, and only a Counter Spell or Wall
will block the bolt.  The basic range can be increased, with
each additional 5m range costing 2 more magic points.
Magic Bridge (4)
When cast, this spell will create a magical bridge across a
chasm, river or other impassable area.  Requiring a solid
footing at either end, the bridge will span 5 metres for
every 4 magic points put into it.  The bridge is wide
enough for one person, and will support as many people
as it took magic points to cast.  The bridge will last for 5
minutes, but will start to fade gently after 4 minutes.
Poison (4)
This spell can create a powerful poison from any small
amount of liquid or edible item.  It can also combine with
a Fog spell to create a cloud of poison or even poison a
target directly if the caster is touching bare flesh when the
spell is cast.  The poison is fast acting and immediately
delivers STAMINA damage equal to 2 plus the total
number of magic points put into the spell.  A Wizard using
an additional 6 magic points would thus create a poison
inflicting 12 points of STAMINA damage.
Restrain (4)
This spell will bind the target object or creature in bands
of magical energy, fixing them in place even if they are
airborne!  Once bound, the target cannot move a muscle,
although they can steal breathe.  Even gravity will not
affect a Restrained target, so a falling boulder or leaping
combatant could both be fixed in the air.  The spell lasts
for three minutes, and normal physics will take over when
the Restraint is removed.  Up to 3 cubic metres may be
affected by this spell.
Shrink (4)
This spell is the reverse of the Grow spell, causing the
target to shrink to half their normal size.  Like Grow, it
can be cast multiple times, shrinking the target by half
each time.  Whilst under the effects of one of these spells,
the target will suffer the effects of a Weakness spell, sue
to their small size.  This spell will last for 3 minutes or until
cancelled by the caster.
Speak to Animals (4)
Similar to the Languages spell, this useful casting will
allow the caster to speak to any animal for the following
10 minutes.  Although the caster can communicate, this
does not guarantee that the animal will be interested in
talking as some have very limited attention spans!
Wall (4)
This spell creates a circular wall, 5m in diameter, around
the caster or one nominated object.  The wall lasts 5
minutes, and is completely impervious to all attacks,
objects and even spells.  Only a Counter Spell can cancel
the wall, although if anything or anyone inside touches
the wall, it will disappear immediately.  The wall will
remain stationary for the duration.
Weather Control (4)
This spell utilises multiple elemental controls to control
the local weather as desired by the caster.  It will only
affect the weather directly overhead. This spell can affect
an area the size of a small village or field.  Unusual
weather such as heavy rain, a small whirlwind or even a
blizzard could be summoned or calmed.  However, the
basic spell will only affect the weather by some degree.
Turning rain into snow, or cloud into a clear sky can be
accomplished with the basic spell.  Turning heavy snow
into hot sunshine would require as many as 8 extra magic
points.  The basic form of this spell will last for 5 minutes,
and extending this costs 2 magic points per extra 5 minutes.
Banish Undead (6)
This spell will destroy the lifeforce that animates one
single undead, thus returning it to a peaceful rest.  Whilst
the target may attempt to resist the spell as normal, the
test is reduced by the MAGIC characteristic of the caster.
78     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 80 ---

An undead creature banished by this spell can never be
animated again, so this spell is sometimes cast on the
bodies of dead heroes to prevent them ever being raised.
Cockroach (6)
This particularly nasty spell has featured in many legends
and folk tales, where it has turned Heroes into frogs,
cockroaches or mice.  Thus if the target fails their test for
LUCK, they permanently become a small and inoffensive
creature of the casters choice.  Their clothes and other
possessions are not affected, and so drop to the ground
where their owner once stood.  The poor victim still retains
their knowledge and consciousness but can only speak in
an animal language.  The caster may reverse this spell by
touching the target and willing it so, otherwise only a
counterspell can reverse the transformation.
Exchange Shape (6)
This spell requires the Wizard to touch the victim whilst
the spell is cast; If the target fails his test for LUCK, the
Wizard and target exchange bodies!  The caster will retain
his own characteristics, but will of course be free of most
curses, poisons and diseases that the old body suffered
from.  This spell is permanent, although a successful
counterspell will reverse it, forcing the original caster back
into his own body, wherever that might be.  If the casters
original body has died, the counterspell will effectively
kill him.  The caster will however acquire any special
abilities the new body possesses.  Thus a caster
Exchanging Shape with a Birdman will be able to fly, even
if a bit of practice is required first.
Hurricane (6)
This specialised version of the Weather Control spell
conjures up a 30 metre radius storm around the caster,
with ferocious winds, hail., rain and even snow.  Everyone
caught in the area of effect (except the caster) must test
either their LUCK or SKILL or be blown right off their feet,
suffering 1D3 points of STAMINA damage in the process.
Attempting to stand or move away requires another test.
Combat, spellcasting and conversation are almost
impossible within the area of effect, with the Hurricane
lasting 5 minutes.  The caster himself must concentrate
throughout the duration and may take no other actions.
It is also possible that other objects or even buildings
within the area may be damaged by the spell.
Petrify (6)
This powerful spell will start turning one target, who must
be within 5 metres, to stone.  Starting with the feet, and
creeping slowly upwards, the target will lose 1 STAMINA
and 1 SKILL every two combat rounds until his current
STAMINA score reaches 0 (SKILL will stop declining at
0).  When this has happened, the target, his clothes and
equipment included, will be completely made of stone.
The process can be reversed if a counterspell is cast or the
caster is killed before the process is completed.  If the
victim is fully petrified, he can never be turned back.
Raise Skeleton (6)
A favourite with Necromancers, this spell will animate a
corpse with a spark of living spirit, forcing it to return as
an undead under the control of the caster.  The spell itself
takes a whole hour to cast, and requires a corpse of some
kind.  If the corpse is incomplete, the resulting skeleton
will be missing that body part.  The caster must be close
to the skeleton to issue it with orders; Said orders will be
followed 
literally 
until 
countermanded 
by 
the
Necromancer.
By expending different amounts of magic points, other
undead may be created as follows:  Crypt Stalker (7),
Skeleton Warrior (7), Zombie (7), Decayer (8) or Ghoul (8).
A Necromancer may have a maximum of four Raised
Undead at any one time for every point he has in his
combined MAGIC characteristic and Magic-Wizardry
special skill.
It should also be noted that Raising Undead is considered
an evil act in most lands.
See Future (6)
This spell allows the caster to see brief scenes from the
near future of either himself or one known person.  The
future in this case is no more than 2 days, and the visions
are often confusing and obscure.  The visions are of events
that will probably happen, but intervening events may
change this.  This spell often presents problems for the
Director, as he will be required to predict what will
happen…..
Teleport (6)
This spell is a very powerful addition to the repertoire of
any Wizard.  This spell will allow the caster to travel
instantly between two places that are less than 10km apart!
The caster must have some idea of where he will appear,
although a very good description would suffice from
someone who knows the place well.  The spell will
transport the caster and whatever he can carry in his hands
(including up to one other person) to the target location.
Assuming the spell works correctly, the caster appears
immediately.
MAGIC        79


--- PAGE 81 ---

Wall of Power (6)
This spell is a more powerful version of the Wall spell,
and creates a similar barrier around the caster, although
this one is dome-shaped, an can be increased in size by
spending an additional 3 magic points for every extra 5
metres diameter.  This wall will not only keep enemies
out, but will actively damage any who try to pass through.
Any being touching the outside of the wall will take 3D6
points of damage (armour will protect against this
damage) , and although they will not be able to pass
through the wall, will continue to take damage on each
round 
they 
are 
in
contact with it.  Lasting
five minutes, this spell
can only be removed
with a counterspell, or
another wall of power
(which destroys both
walls).
Web (6)
This spell will fill an
area up to 5 metres in
diameter with strong,
sticky 
spider 
webs.
Anyone within the area
will 
be 
bound 
by
multiple strands and
c o m p l e t e l y
immobilised. A very
strong victim such as a
Troll or Giant can break
out in two rounds, and
any Hero with the
Strength special skill
can break out after two
successful 
Strength
tests.  Heroes without
the Strength special
skill must wait for the 5
minute 
duration 
to
elapse before they are
freed.
Assassin’s Dagger (8)
This spell is much
beloved 
of 
evil
Wizards, to be used
against luckless Heroes
who have escaped their
grasp.  When cast upon
a known enemy, this
spell creates a ghostly
hand holding a dagger.  This hand immediately sets off
directly towards its target at a steady walking pace.
Whilst not very fast, the hand is relentless and never stops
or rests, and will float ever onwards towards its victim.
The hand can be trapped for a short while if the victim is
ingenious enough, although this will only ever be short
term relief.  If the hand does catch up with its victim, It
attacks with SKILL 10, but never takes any damage if it
loses a combat round.  The only way to cancel the curse
is to cast a counterspell on the hand (which must be
present).
Death (8)
This very potent spell will kill one target within 5 metres
instantly, and there is no test for LUCK to avoid the effects!
This spell does actually cost the caster 12 Magic points
(not 8) and ages him one year, although that is little
consolation to the victim!
Earthquake (8)
This spell will cause a
powerful 
but 
localised
earthquake over an area of up
to 30 metres diameter.  The
ground will heave and shake,
damaging buildings and even
demolishing rickety ones.
Large cracks open up in the
ground, and all beings within
the area must test for LUCK
or be lost down one of these.
The earthquake will last for 3
minutes, and any characters
who have fallen into a crack
will be stuck there until the
earthquake subsides.  Even
those 
who 
avoid 
being
swallowed by the earth must
make a test against SKILL
each round to stay on their
feet.  Only the caster is
immune to the effects of the
spell.  The diameter of effect
may be increased by 10m
simply be expending an
additional magic point.
80     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 82 ---

MAGIC        81
SORCERY
Sorcery is a magic style initially developed in the Old
World, but now disseminated across the whole of Titan.
Sorcery uses the same arcane energies as Wizardry, but
instead of distilling these energies from the surrounding
environment to power spells, Sorcerers draw energy from
their own bodies.  Thus Sorcery spells are powered by
STAMINA rather than magic points and a Sorcerer will
only use magic points if he also knows minor magic spells.
One consequence of this approach is that some spells
require physical foci, or components, for the spell to work
properly.  Whilst many of these components are easy to
obtain, some are much rarer.  The primary consequence
of Sorcery is that using spells depletes the casters own
physical reserves, possibly leaving them more vulnerable
to attack.  Unlike Wizardry, Sorcerers learn all of the spells
available during their training.
Casting Sorcery Spells
Sorcery Spellcasting follows the standard procedure, with
a test being made against the total of the casters MAGIC
characteristic and Magic-Sorcery special skill.  This total,
for Sorcery, is referred to as the Sorcerers “Inner Strength”.
As with the other magical styles, certain modifiers will
apply to the spellcasting test:
 
Sorcery Casting Situation 
 
   Modifier
 
Each continuous round of preparation 
+2
 
Quiet surroundings                                   
+3
 
Not under attack                                      
+0
 
Caster is Target of 1 ranged attack        
-1
 
Caster is Target of >1 range attacks       
-2
 
Target of 1 melee attack                             
-2
 
Target of >1 melee attack                            
-4
As with Wizardry, a roll of double 6 will result in an
automatic spell failure and will also require a roll on the
Oops table.  However, unlike Wizardry, the wearing of
armour does not affect Sorcery spell.  A Sorcerer will still
require the Armour special skill to receive the full
protective benefit from the armour though.
Components
A Sorcerer must always have a component if one is
required, and there is no way to cast one of these spells
without.  The required STAMINA is deducted
immediately after the spell is cast, and it is entirely
possible for a Sorcerer to knock himself unconscious with
the casting of a more powerful spell.  It is also worth
noting that casting a Sorcery spell does not cause wounds,
only weakens the essential life force of the Sorcerer.  Thus
the Healing special skill will not be able to restore
STAMINA lost through spell casting, although food, sleep,
a Healing potion or priestly ability would.
A final word on components.  Some, such as Gold-backed
mirrors, Galehorns or Pearl Rings, can be purchased from
suitable vendors or found as treasure.  Others, such as
sand and pebbles, may be selected in nature at no cost.
Components such as Beeswax or Goblins Teeth can be
harvested from a beehive or goblin corpse.  It it suggested
that a Director allow only one lump of wax or tooth be
harvested from each of these sources.  Some components
will be consumed during the casting of the spell, whilst
others can be reused indefinitely.
The availability of components is of course one
mechanism whereby the Director can restrict the
availability of Sorcery spells.  It is also a one of the major
restrictions on the power of a Sorcerer.
PLAY TIPS: There are certain advantages and
disadvantages to being a Sorcerer.  Sorcerers start knowing all
the spells, and will never have to learn new spells.  Even though
some of these will require components, Sorcerers will have a
much larger repertoire early on, and even in later stages of a
campaign.  A Sorcerer is also less reliant on a high MAGIC
characteristic than a Wizard.  Although a Sorcerer must still
test their MAGIC to cast spells, they do not require magic
points.  This, combined with the ability to wear armour, means
that the Sorcerer can be reasonable in combat or other situations.
On the downside, a Sorcerer powers their spells with
STAMINA, meaning that a Sorcerer must have a reasonable
STAMINA to begin with, but even so, casting several spells can
severely weaken a Sorcerer and leave them vulnerable in a fight.
Sorcerers can however wear armour, and so can often hold their
own in a hand-to-hand fight.


--- PAGE 83 ---

SORCERY SPELL DESCRIPTIONS
Listed below are all of the Sorcery spells that each Sorcerer
knows.  Each spell is listed as a 3 word name, a system
devised by the earliest Sorcerers, along with any required
components and a spell description.  Unless specifically
noted otherwise, the components are not consumed.
Many of the spell effects are dependent on the Sorcerers
“Inner Strength”.  This again is the total of the casters
MAGIC characteristic and his Magic-Sorcery special skill.
ZAP (4)
Component: None
One of the more powerful Sorcery spells, ZAP fires a large
bolt of lightning at one target within 30m, causing 3D6
points of STAMINA damage.  Armour is of no use against
this spell, and the target does not receive a test for LUCK.
HOT (4)
Component: None
The HOT spell fires a large ball of fire at one target within
30m, bursting on impact into a 3m radius circle of fire.
Anyone caught within the radius of effect will take 1D6+1
points of STAMINA damage.  Especially flammable
targets will find themselves ignited by this spell, as will
flammable objects.
FOF (4)
Component: None
When cast, this spell creates a personal and impervious
barrier a couple of inches from the caster.  This barrier will
block attacks from both inside and outside, and will also
block all spells.  This barrier will last for a number of
minutes equal to the casters Inner Strength, and will move
with the caster at walking pace during this time.
WAL (4)
Component: None
This spell will create a 3m x 3m wall of magic that will
block anything physical passing through from either
direction.  This wall cannot be moved once created, but
will stop all physical objects, and will even stop a falling
building or landslide!
LAW (4)
Component: None
This spell will only work on creatures with Low or No
intelligence.  Lasting a number of rounds equal to the
casters Inner Strength, this spell will completely dominate
the targets intelligence, effectively leaving the target under
the complete control of the caster.  The target will of course
receive a test for LUCK, but need not speak the same
language as the caster.  This spell will allow the caster to
order the target with almost any actions, although
anything completely out of character will not be obeyed.
The target must stay within eyesight of the caster for the
spell to continue to work.
DUM (4)
Component: None
This spell will make the target (if it fails a test for LUCK)
badly uncoordinated and clumsy.  As with many Sorcery
spells, the effects will last for a number of combat rounds
equal to the casters Inner Strength.  Outside combat, an
affected target will drop handheld objects on a roll of 1-3
on 1D6.  This should be checked each round.
In combat, a target will fight at a penalty of -2 and will
fumble on any double.  If a double 6 is rolled, the victim
must make two rolls on the fumble table.
BIG (2)
Component: None
This spell will instantly grow the caster to double their
normal size.  The caster now inflicts double normal
damage will all hand-to-hand effects, but will make all
physical tests (except Strength) with a penalty of -2 due
to the difficulty of coordinating such a large body.  This
spell will last for a number of combat rounds equal to the
casters Inner Strength.
WOK (1)
Component: A gold coin
Whilst casting this spell, the Sorcerer places the gold coin
on his wrist, and the coin becomes a large magical shield.
The shield has no weight, and acts in all respects as a large
shield.  The shield will last for a number of minutes equal
to the Sorcerers Inner Strength, and then disappear, along
with the coin.
DOP (2)
Component: None
This spell will open or unlock any one door or chest, even
if the door is barred instead of locked.  The door or chest
to be opened must be touched by the Sorcerer as the spell
is cast.
RAZ (1)
Component: Beeswax
As the Sorcerer casts this spell, the beeswax must be run
along the cutting edge of a bladed weapon.  He weapon
becomes super sharp for a number of combat rounds equal
to the casters Inner Strength, adding +2 to all damage rolls
with that weapon.  The portion of beeswax is consumed
by the spell.
82     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 84 ---

SUS (2)
Component: None
When cast, the Sorcerer is made aware of any trap or
ambush within 10m.  This spell will actually detect all
traps and ambushes, even those not laid for the caster!
The Sorcerer will be aware of the direction and rough
distance of each threat, and will know whether the threat
is a trap or ambush, but other details are not forthcoming.
SIX (2)
Component: None
This spell creates 5 illusionary duplicates of the caster who
mirror his every move.   In combat, any successful attack
against the Sorcerer will only stand a 1 in 6 chance of
hitting the real copy.  However, the copies will be
dispelled when hit, so if a duplicate is hit, the next attack
will stand a 1 in 5 chance of hitting the caster and so on.
These duplicates will not count as extra combatants for
outnumbering purposes, and will not strike any
opponents.  If not dispelled by attacks, these duplicates
will vanish after a number of combat rounds equal to the
Sorcerers Inner Strength.
JIG (1)
Component: Bamboo Flute
The caster must play the flute as this spell is cast.  The spell
will cause one target to start dancing uncontrollably to the
music, and cannot take any voluntary actions.  As is usual
with spells of this sort, the victim may test for LUCK to
avoid the effects.  If the dancing victim is attacked, they
can make a combat roll as normal, but suffer a -2 penalty
to their attack strength and cannot inflict any damage.
The spell will last for a number of rounds equal to the
Sorcerers Inner Strength or until the Sorcerer stops
playing, whichever is shorter.
GOB (1)
Component: Goblin Tooth
This spell will consume a Goblin Tooth to summon a
Goblin warrior (SKILL 5/STAMINA 5) to fight for the
Sorcerer.  The Goblin will obey any command, even
suicidal ones, and will persist for a number of minutes
equal to the casters Magic Inner Strength or until killed.
The Goblin will appear with normal Goblin equipment,
which will also disappear when the Goblin does.
YOB (1)
Component: Giant Molar
This spell is similar to the GOB spell, except that a Giant
molar is used up to summon a Cave Giant (SKILL 9 /
STAMINA 10).  As with GOB, this summoned creature is
equipped and entirely subservient to the will of the
Sorcerer.  Problems may be encountered if there is limited
headroom!  The Giant will persist for a number of combat
rounds equal to the casters Inner Strength.
GUM (1)
Component: A Vial of Glue
When casting this spell, the caster throws a vial of glue at
the feet of the target.  The spell causes the glue to  spread
out and become super-sticky, making it very difficult for
the victim to move freely.  The target may test for LUCK
to avoid the effects, but if this test is failed the target must
halve their SKILL (rounded up) for all physical actions
including combat.  The glue will last for a number of
combat rounds equal to the casters Inner Strength.  The
vial of glue is consumed by the spell.
HOW (2)
Component: None
This spell can be cast when there is a choice of two or more
ways onwards.  The caster must have a goal in mind, such
as escape, safety, accessing the centre of the dungeon etc.
This spell will then give the caster a psychic nudge
towards one of the ways onwards.  The Director should
make an educated decision on which way is best to follow.
DOC (1)
Component:A medicinal potion
This spell, when combined with the target drinking a
healing potion, will result in the healing potion having
double the normal effect.  This spell is one of the few that
will not work on the Sorcerer himself.  In addition, some
herbal potions may be enhanced to completely cure a
poison or disease.  These should be adjudicated on a case
by case basis by the Director.
DOZ (2)
Component: None
This spell will cause a victims movements to slow and
become sluggish if they fail a test for LUCK.  The target
makes all physical tests, including combat, at -4, and the
target will also be able to inflict damage on even
numbered rounds.  If the Target wins an odd-numbered
attack round, they will not inflict any damage.
The effects will last for a number of combat rounds equal
to the casters Inner Strength.
DUD (2)
Component: None
When cast, this spell will turn stones, sticks and other
debris into apparent treasure worth 1D6x10gp.  The
treasure is only illusionary however, and will vanish after
a number of hours equal to the casters Inner Strength.  The
false treasure will radiate a faint magical aura, and a
MAGIC        83


--- PAGE 85 ---

successful test of awareness will give the target an
indication that the treasure is not all it seems.
MAG (2)
Component: None
This spell acts as a pre-emptive counterspell, protecting
against the next hostile spell cast against the Sorcerer.  This
spell will remain active for as many combat rounds as the
Sorcerer has Inner Strength, but will only stop one spell,
regardless of the power of the attacking spell.
POP (1)
Component: Small stone
This spell must be cast on a small stone held by the caster.
This stone is charged with magical power such that it will
inflict 1D3 damage if thrown at an opponent or object.  A
stone will retain its power for a number of combat rounds
equal to the casters Inner Strength, and a stone can be
thrown by anyone.
FAL (2)
Component: None
When cast, this spell will protect the Sorcerer against one
fall.  This spell may be cast before or during a fall, as long
as the fall is above 15m, thus giving the Sorcerer time to
cast the spell.  This spell will not provide the power of
flight, but will merely act as a magical parachute, gently
lowering the caster to the ground.
DIM (2)
Component: None
When cast, this spell will cause the mind of one target
within 5m to become severely confused if they fail a test
for LUCK.  The effects will last for one round for every
two full points in Inner Strength, and each round must
roll 1D6 and consult the following table to find out what
action they will take:
 
Roll Action
 
  1 Target attacks Sorcerer
 
  2 Target attacks own friends
 
  3 Target attacks random opponent
 
  4 Target dithers and does nothing
 
  5 Target flees for one round
 
  6 Target may choose his own actions
FOG (2)
Component: None
When cast this spell will fill one enclosed space with a
dense fog, making activity for all concerned almost
impossible.  All caught within the room will make all
physical tests at a penalty of -4(except the caster who will
only have a penalty of -1) until the fog dissipates after a
number of combat rounds equal to Inner Strength.
MUD (1)
Component: A handful of sand
As this spell is cast, the Sorcerer must throw a handful of
sand over the area desired.  This spell will turn the area
of ground 3m across into a deep quicksand.  Any creature
stepping into the quicksand will start sinking into it.  The
victim must immediately test their SKILL or LUCK to
avoid being caught, but if they do escape they will escape
back to where they started.  A captured creature will
drown in a number of rounds equal to their own SKILL
characteristic, during which time they will sink lower and
lower.  The target can fight anyone within weapon range,
but will have a penalty equal to 1 for every round they
have been sinking.  They may be rescued with a suitable
plan by anyone not stuck.
The quicksand will last for a number of minutes equal to
the casters Inner Strength.
NIF (1)
Component: Nose Plugs
This spell is unique in that the material component is not
absolutely required to cast the spell, but without the nose
plugs, the caster will suffer the full effects of the spell.
When the spell take effects, the enclosed space
immediately fills with an incredibly bad smell.  All within
suffer a penalty of -2 or more to all actions whilst the smell
persists.  Most Humanoid creatures suffer a -2 penalty,
unless they have the Awareness special skill of 3 or more,
in which case the level of Awareness is used as the penalty.
The general principle is that the better the sense of smell
the target has, the higher the penalty.  Creatures such as
wolves with a good sense of smell will have a penalty of
-4.  The smell will persist for a number of combat rounds
equal to the casters Inner Strength.
TEL (1)
Component: A cloth skullcap
This spell is almost identical to the wizardy spell ESP (rank
2).  It will allow the caster to read the surface thoughts and
emotions of one target within 5 metres, and will last for a
number of combat rounds equal to the Sorcerers Inner
Strength.
GAK (1)
Component: A black facemask
When this spell is cast and the mask held up to the casters
face, one target within sight must immediately test for
LUCK.  If this test is failed, the target will immediately
flee the caster for a number of rounds equal to 12 minus
the targets SKILL characteristic.
SAP (2)
Component: None
This spell will drain all morale, confidence and energy
from the target, causing them to fight with a -1 penalty to
SKILL, a -1 modification to damage rolls, and a -1 penalty
to armour rolls as the victim becomes very lacklustre.  The
target will of course receive a test for LUCK to avoid the
84     ADVANCED FIGHTING FANTASY


--- PAGE 86 ---

effects and the effects will last for one round for every
point the caster has in their Inner Strength.
GOD (1)
Component:A jewel of gold
This spell, when cast, will cause all humanoids nearby to
become more favourably disposed towards the caster.
This will cause all reactions (as described in Chapter 2) to
shift one place towards friendly; Hostile > Unfriendly >
Neutral > Friendly, and will also apply a +2 bonus to all
social type tests with those affected.  Creatures that are
tasked with being hostile to the Sorcerer, such as guards,
assassins etc, are allowed a test vs LUCK, but other
creatures should not.  The jewel of gold is consumed by
this spell.
KIN (1)
Component: A gold-backed mirror
The caster must hold up a gold-backed mirror as this spell
is cast.  The spell then creates a double of the target, who
receives a test for LUCK to prevent the spell working.  If
a double does appear, it will attack the original and will
have the same SKILL and STAMINA as the original, and
the same equipment, although none of the special abilities
or spellcasting.
The copy’s weapons and armour will also not have any
magical abilities of the originals.  This spell is best used
against lone enemies as any outside interference in the
subsequent combat will dispel the copy.  During the fight,
the caster must keep the mirror pointed at the combat.
The copy will persist for a number of rounds equal to the
casters Inner Strength, but will disappear if either
combatant is defeated.
PEP (1)
Component: A potion of Firewater
This spell will greatly increase the strength of the caster,
who must drink a potion of firewater during casting.  The
caster will gain a +3 bonus to all damage rolls for a number
of rounds equal to the casters Inner Strength.  There is also
a +3 bonus to the Strength special skill during this time.
ROK (1)
Component: Rock Dust
This spell will instantly turn to stone one target whom the
caster throws a handful of rock dust over.  There is of
course a test for LUCK to avoid this effect.  If the test is
failed, the target and all he carries is turned to stone.  The
victim will return to normal form after 3 minutes, and will
be mostly impervious to normal attacks during this time.
The Director will need to rule on the affect of any magical
attacks.  The casting of this spell will consume the rock
dust.
NIP (1)
Component: Yellow Powder
Whilst casting this spell the Sorcerer must sniff a special
yellow powder.  For a number of combat rounds equal to
half of his Inner Strength (rounded down), the caster may
act at double the normal rate.  Thus the caster may attack
twice per round, may cast two spells, may run at twice
normal speed or any combination of these.  Thus under
the effects of these spells, a Sorcerer may cast a spell and
attack in the same round.
HUF (1)
Component: A galehorn
When casting this spell, the Sorcerer must blow hard into
a Galehorn in the direction of the target(s).  As the spell
takes effect, a huge blast of wind knocks over all man-
sized or smaller beings within 3m of the target point.  All
affected beings may not take any action in the current
round other than getting up, although they may also not
be attacked with hand-to-hand or missile weapons due to
the high winds in the area of effect.
FIX (1)
Component: A staff of oak
This spell will fix one target in place, removing it from all
natural laws.  If the target is alive, it gets to test for LUCK
to resist the spell, otherwise it is is frozen and fixed in
place.  The target is no longer affected by gravity, time or
indeed any other natural or magical force.  All the while
the Sorcerer concentrates and keeps the staff pointed at
the target, the victim is fixed.  As soon as this
concentration is dropped, the target is subject again to
whatever forces were acting on the target at the time they
were fixed.  Thus a Sorcerer fixing a wyvern diving to
attack the caster would resume the same dive when the
fix was removed.
NAP (1)
Component: A brass pendulum
The caster must set the pendulum swinging as the spell is
cast, hypnotising a creature and then sending it to sleep.
There is a test for LUCK to avoid the effects, although if
the target fails they will instantly fall into a natural sleep.
They will only wake up when they would normally wake,
although loud noises etc will also wake the target up.
ZEN (1)
Component: Jewel studded medallion
This spell is somewhere between the Levitate and Fly
spells in power.  Once cast, the Sorcerer may float up,
down or in any direction, up to a maximum of 2 metres
every combat round.  No other spells may be cast whilst
the Sorcerer is floating, and the caster may not attack
anyone, but otherwise the spell only ends when the
Sorcerer touches down on a solid surface.
YAZ (1)
Component: A pearl ring
This spell causes the caster and all that he carries to
become invisible.  The invisibility lasts for as many
minutes as the caster has points in Inner Strength,
although it will end early if the caster attacks anyone or
casts another spell.
MAGIC        85
